

Question: What is full form of GTA?
Answer: The full form of GTA is Grand Theft Auto. Its short form is GTA/

Question: Who are you?
Answer: I am AI Agent who specializes in GTA (Grand Theft Auto). My primary focus is to solve all queries related to GTA

Question: What is GTA ?
Answer: Grand Theft Auto, commonly referred to as GTA, is an open world action-adventure crime sandbox video-game series, as well as one of the longest video-game arcade series, published by Rockstar Games and developed by its subsidiary companies, including Rockstar North (formerly DMA Design Limited), Rockstar Leeds, Rockstar Toronto and Rockstar Lincoln. The first games were developed by Rockstar North (formerly DMA Design) and BMG Interactive (a subsidiary of BMG Records). The first game of the series was released in 1997.
There are currently seventeen games in the series, plus two expansion packs for the original and two expansions for GTA IV and including a multiplayer title. The games have been released for various platforms (e.g. Microsoft Xbox (Original Xbox, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Xbox Series X/S), Sony PlayStation (PS1, PS2, PS3, PS4, PS5) PC (Windows, MS-DOS), macOS (OS X) and Sega Dreamcast), including the Game Boy Color (GBC) Game Boy Advance (GBA), PlayStation Portable , Nintendo DS, iOS, Android and Fire OS, with all but two of the games released on multiple platforms.
There has been much controversy involving the series. The unofficial Hot Coffee mod and subsequent uproar gave Rockstar Games a huge amount of press attention.
Grand Theft Auto currently holds 10 world gaming records, including the Most Guest Stars in a Video Game Series, Largest Voice Cast in a Video Game (Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas), Largest In-Game Soundtrack (Grand Theft Auto IV), and Most Successful Entertainment Launch Of All Time (Grand Theft Auto V). The Grand Theft Auto series is also ranked 5 in the best-selling video-game franchises of all time. Its main series of games include Grand Theft Auto (1997), Grand Theft Auto 2 (1999), Grand Theft Auto III (2001), Grand Theft Auto: Vice City (2002), Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas (2004), Grand Theft Auto IV (2008), Grand Theft Auto V (2013) and Grand Theft Auto VI (2025). Expansion packs include Grand Theft Auto: London 1969 and Grand Theft Auto: London 1961 (both released 1999) and Grand Theft Auto IV: The Lost and Damned and Grand Theft Auto: The Ballad of Gay Tony (both released 2009). Handheld GTA games include Grand Theft Auto Advance (2004), Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories (2005), Grand Theft Auto: Vice City Stories (2006) and Grand Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars (2009). Grand Theft Auto has also been released in compilations and remasters, including Grand Theft Auto: Director's Cut (1999), Grand Theft Auto: The Classics Collection and Grand Theft Auto: Double Pack (both released 2003), Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy (2005), Grand Theft Auto: Double Pack and Grand Theft Auto: Episodes from Liberty City (2009), Grand Theft Auto IV: Complete Edition (2010) and Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy - The Definitive Edition (2021).

Question: How many GTA games are there?
Answer: There are currently seventeen games in the series, plus two expansion packs for the original and two expansions for GTA IV and including a multiplayer title. The games have been released for various platforms (e.g. Microsoft Xbox (Original Xbox, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Xbox Series X/S), Sony PlayStation (PS1, PS2, PS3, PS4, PS5) PC (Windows, MS-DOS), macOS (OS X) and Sega Dreamcast), including the Game Boy Color (GBC) Game Boy Advance (GBA), PlayStation Portable , Nintendo DS, iOS, Android and Fire OS, with all but two of the games released on multiple platforms.
There has been much controversy involving the series. The unofficial Hot Coffee mod and subsequent uproar gave Rockstar Games a huge amount of press attention.

Question: General Gameplay style of GTA?
Answer: The GTA games allows to play as an upcoming criminal in big cities based on real-life places. The player can use various weapons, as well driving various vehicles.
The games are build up from many missions, given by many characters, such as, drugs dealers, mafia members, gangsters, famous people and other similars. The player can choose the time of doing the missions, as well the order of the missions, if more than one are available. Other than story-line missions, there are also side-missions and tasks which the player must do for 100% completion of the game.
The player has almost unlimited freedom, and can explore the games' locations at almost any time they want. If the player is to start commiting crimes, various law enforcers and law enforcement agencies will come to the player's location to the player by arresting or killing them.
The games include various weapons, such as M1911, Glock pistols, Desert Eagle, AK-47, Uzi, MP-5 and melee weapons like bats, knifes, swords and many others.
The player can drive variety of vehicles: cars, trucks, bikes, airplanes, helicopters, boat, ships, hovercrafts. In almost every game, the player can change the color of land vehicles by visiting a Pay 'n Spray. The player can get vehicles by stealing them, buying them, order them from friends (GTA IV Era only), or given them by NPCs.

Question: List all GTA Games in Order?
Answer: The table below in csv shows the main games and its details:
Game,Universe,Year,Set In,Protagonist(s),Platform(s)
Grand Theft Auto 1,2D,1997,1997,Player's choice,"PC, PlayStation, Game Boy Color"
Grand Theft Auto 2,2D,1999,2013,Claude Speed,"PC, PlayStation, Dreamcast, Game Boy Color"
Grand Theft Auto III,3D,2001,2001,Claude,"PC, PlayStation 2, Xbox, iOS devices, Android devices"
Grand Theft Auto: Vice City,3D,2002,1986,Tommy Vercetti,"PC, PlayStation 2, Xbox, iOS devices, Android devices"
Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas,3D,2004,1992,Carl Johnson,"PC, PlayStation 2, Xbox, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Mobile Devices"
Grand Theft Auto IV,HD,2008,2008,Niko Bellic,"PC, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360"
Grand Theft Auto V,HD,2013,2013,"Michael De Santa; Franklin Clinton; Trevor Philips","PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation 4, PC, Xbox One, PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X/S"
Grand Theft Auto VI,HD,2025,2025,"Lucia; Jason","PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X/S"

The table below in csv shows the other gta games and its details:
Game,Universe,Year,Set In,Protagonist(s),Platform(s)
Grand Theft Auto: London 1969,2D,1999,1969,Player's choice,PC, PlayStation
Grand Theft Auto: London 1961,2D,1999,1961,Player's choice,PC
Grand Theft Auto Advance,3D,2004,2000,Mike,Game Boy Advance
Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories,3D,2005,1998,Toni Cipriani,PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable
Grand Theft Auto: Vice City Stories,3D,2006,1984,Victor Vance,PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable
Grand Theft Auto: The Lost and Damned,HD,2009,2008,Johnny Klebitz,PC, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360
Grand Theft Auto: The Ballad of Gay Tony,HD,2009,2008,Luis Fernando Lopez,PC, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360
Grand Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars,HD,2010,2009,Huang Lee,Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, iOS devices
Grand Theft Auto Online,HD,2013,2013-Present,GTA Online Protagonist,PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, PC, PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X/S


Question: List GTA games that were set in 2D Universe?
Answer: In the 2D Universe there is the original game, the subsequent two expansion packs featuring missions in 1960's London and GTA 2, which featured an improved graphics engine and a different style of gameplay. Whilst originally just called "Grand Theft Auto", the first game and era have become known as "GTA 1" for clarity.

1. Grand Theft Auto (1997) - Available for the PlayStation, PC and Game Boy Color. Features the cities of Liberty City, San Andreas, and Vice City.
2. Grand Theft Auto (Mission Pack #1): London 1969 (1999) - An expansion pack, available for the PlayStation and PC, set in London. London is the only playable city in the series with a real name.
3. Grand Theft Auto (Mission Pack #2): London 1961 (1999) - A further expansion to London 1969, available only as a free download for the PC.
4. Grand Theft Auto 2 (1999) - Available for the PlayStation, PC, Dreamcast, and Game Boy Color. The game is set in completely fictional Anywhere City. GTA 2 is the only GTA game to have a digit in the title instead of a Roman Numeral. It is the only game to have a T rating.

Question: List GTA games that were set in 3D Universe?
Answer: The 3D Universe featured the first blockbuster GTA title, Grand Theft Auto III, and introduced a 3D game world and a third person perspective. The entire era contains interlocking storylines, and many characters appear across multiple games. Notably, games in this era were not released in chronological order, with first game released being the last chronologically, and the last game released being the first chronologically.
Grand Theft Auto III (2001) - Set in fictional Liberty City, based upon the real life New York City. Multiplayer game mode was lost, but other areas were much improved, namely the graphics, voice acting, storyline with non-linear gameplay.
Grand Theft Auto: Vice City (2002) - Set in Vice City, a city based on real life Miami. This sequel to GTA III is technically a prequel (set in 1986) to the game, and to GTA San Andreas, which was released after GTA Vice City.
Grand Theft Auto Advance (2004) - What was originally supposed to be a cut-down port of GTA III for the Game Boy Advance, turned out to be a completely original game, set a year before GTA III, in a slightly changed Liberty City.
Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas (2004) - Set in the state of San Andreas, featured three cities, Los Santos, San Fierro and Las Venturas, based on Los Angeles, San Francisco and Las Vegas respectively. The game is set in 1992, making it a sequel to GTA Vice City, and prequel to GTA III. The game featured a lot more customization options, for both players and vehicles.
Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories (2005) - A prequel set in Liberty City, 1998. Originally for the PlayStation Portable, a PS2 port was released in June 2006 without multiplayer.
Grand Theft Auto: Vice City Stories (2006) - Announced on May 10th during E3, is based in Vice City, 1984, two years before the original GTA Vice City, featuring Lance Vance's brother Victor Vance as the protagonist. It was released in October 2006 for the PSP. A PS2 port was released later without multiplayer in March 2007.
It is generally believed that the 3D Universe has been completed, and there will be no more official expansions on the characters, storylines or engine. However modifications and fan fiction continue to build on these.


Question: List GTA games that were set in HD Universe?
Answer: The HD Universe features Rockstar's new RAGE engine, also used in Rockstar Games Presents Table Tennis. This era features
11. Grand Theft Auto IV (2008) - Set in 2008 in a redesigned Liberty City, with new game mechanics, a multiplayer mode, and with protagonist Niko Bellic trying to start a new life. GTA IV was released for Xbox 360, and PlayStation 3 on April 28th, 2008, with a PC release on December 2nd, 2008.
12. The Lost and Damned (2009) - A downloadable episode released in February 2009 for the Xbox 360. TLAD is set in the same Liberty City as GTA IV, with events and characters overlapping with GTA IV. The protagonist is a biker, Johnny Klebitz, of The Lost Brotherhood biker gang. It is also available on a disc Episodes From Liberty City which includes The Ballad of Gay Tony also. It was released on PC (Games for Windows - LIVE) and PlayStation 3 in April 2010.
13. The Ballad of Gay Tony (2009) - A second episode for GTA IV released in October 2009, the last DLC for GTA IV. The protagonist is Luis Lopez, a part-time hoodlum and full-time assistant to legendary nightclub impresario Gay Tony. It was released on the same day as Episodes From Liberty City disc. It was released on PC (Games for Windows - LIVE) and PlayStation 3 in April 2010.
14. Grand Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars (2009) - Set in 2009 and focusing on the Liberty City triads. The protagonist, Huang Lee is the son of a murdered Triad boss who comes to Liberty City. It is set in the same Liberty City as GTA IV (excluding Alderney, but scaled down for the Nintendo DS). PSP and iPhone ports were released later, including new missions, characters and radio stations and improved graphics.
15. Grand Theft Auto V (2013) - Set in 2013 in a recreated Los Santos. According to Rockstar, Grand Theft Auto V is their biggest open world game to date. The game concentrates on "the pursuit of the almighty dollar". In a break with recent tradition, the game features three playable protagonists, Michael De Santa, Franklin Clinton, and Trevor Phillips. The multiplayer mode has been expanded into its own game, dubbed Grand Theft Auto Online.
16. Grand Theft Auto Online (2013) - Set shortly before the events of Grand Theft Auto V in 2013, is considered by Rockstar to the series' first multiplayer title. The player assumes the role of an online protagonist, with the focus of the game being heavily centered on money. Grand Theft Auto Online was released on October 1, 2013, 14 days after the actual game and is played from within GTA V.
17. Grand Theft Auto VI TBA

Question: When will GTA 6 get released?
Answer: Grand Theft Auto VI (GTA 6) is confirmed to release Fall 2025.

Question: What are the missions in GTA 5 ?
Answer: Here's a list of main story missions in GTA V, grouped by character involvement. The game features three protagonists — Michael, Franklin, and Trevor — and many missions involve multiple characters.

🟢 Franklin Clinton Missions
Franklin and Lamar

Repossession

Complications

Chop

The Long Stretch

Marriage Counseling (w/ Michael)

🔵 Michael De Santa Missions
Father/Son

Daddy's Little Girl

Complications

Marriage Counseling

Friend Request

Casing the Jewel Store

🟠 Trevor Philips Missions
Mr. Philips

Trevor Philips Industries

Crystal Maze

Friends Reunited (brings Trevor to Los Santos)

🤝 Multi-Character Missions
Three's Company

Hood Safari

Blitz Play

By the Book

Dead Man Walking

Paleto Score Setup

The Paleto Score

Derailed

Monkey Business

The Big Score (Multiple approaches)

💰 Heists & Planning Missions
These are multi-part missions involving setup and execution:

The Jewel Store Job

The Merryweather Heist

The Paleto Score

The Bureau Raid

The Big Score

Each heist has setup missions, and you often choose your crew and approach (loud/stealthy).

🏁 Final Missions (Multiple Endings)
The Third Way (Canon ending)

Something Sensible

The Time's Come

There are 69 main story missions in total, with dozens more Strangers & Freaks, Random Events, and Side Missions.




HERE IS SOME RELEVANT DATA OF GTA:





----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grand Theft Auto Series All Games in Chronological Order:

Grand Theft Auto (1997)  (GTA 1)
Year: 1997
Description: As a young street hustler, you explore the free worlds of Liberty City, Vice City, and San Andreas while doing jobs and assignments.
Stars: Rhys Davis, Callum Jones, Spike Robinson
Release Date: November 28, 1997
Available Platforms: PC, PlayStation 1, Game Boy Color, and PlayStation Classic

Grand Theft Auto: London, 1969 (1999)  (GTA 1)
Year: 1999
Description: Expansion pack for Grand Theft Auto (1997), adding new missions and vehicles.
Stars: John Berger, Olivia Silverwood-Cope, Noodle
Release Date: April 29, 1999
Available Platforms: PC and PlayStation 1

Grand Theft Auto: London, 1961 (1999)   (GTA 1)
Year: 1999
Description: One of two download-only expansion packs for Grand Theft Auto (1997), featuring the first instance of the Drive-By Shooting feature and expanded multiplayer mechanics.
Stars: John Berger, Hevin 'The Dred BH', Adam
Release Date: June 1, 1999
Available Platform: PC

Grand Theft Auto 2 (1999) (GTA 2)
Year: 1999
Description: A sequel to Grand Theft Auto (1997), where players take the role of an aspiring thug climbing the ranks of the criminal underworld.
Directors: Alex De Rakoff, Jamie King
Stars: Gary Penn, Ian Fulton, Innes Ricard
Release Date: October 22, 1999
Available Platforms: PlayStation 1, PC, Dreamcast, Game Boy Color, and GameCube

Grand Theft Auto III (2001) (GTA 3)
Year: 2001
Description: A young bank robber escapes from police custody and works his way up through the mafia ranks in Liberty City.
Stars: Frank Vincent, Joe Pantoliano, Michael Madsen
Release Date: October 22, 2001
Available Platforms: PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox, PC, iOS Devices, and Android Devices

Grand Theft Auto: Vice City (2002) (GTA Vice City)
Year: 2002
Description: In 1986, Tommy Vercetti is sent to Vice City to take over and rise to the top of the criminal empire.
Stars: Ray Liotta, William Fichtner, Tom Sizemore
Release Date: October 27, 2002
Available Platforms: PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox, PC, iOS Devices, and Android Devices

Grand Theft Auto Advance (2004) (GTA Auto Advance)
Year: 2004
Description: Criminals Mike and Vinnie plan to leave Liberty City, but after Vinnie is killed in an explosion, Mike seeks revenge.
Release Date: October 26, 2004
Available Platforms: Game Boy Advance, GameCube, and Nintendo DS

Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas (2004) (GTA San Andreas)
Year: 2004
Description: In 1992, Carl "CJ" Johnson returns home after a family tragedy to find Los Santos overtaken by crime and corruption.
Stars: Young Maylay, Faizon Love, Yolanda 'Yo-Yo' Whittaker
Release Date: October 26, 2004
Available Platforms: PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Xbox Series X, PC, Apple Macintosh, Apple iOS, and Android

Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy (2005) (GTA Trilogy)
Description: Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy is a collection of games containing Grand Theft Auto III, Grand Theft Auto: Vice City, and Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas for the PC, Macintosh, Xbox and PlayStation 2. It was released on October 19, 2005, in North America and November 4, 2005, in Europe.
Release Date: October 19, 2005
Available Platforms: PC, PlayStation 2, and Xbox

Grand Theft Auto Liberty City Stories (2005)
Description: Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories is a 2005 action-adventure game developed in a collaboration between Rockstar Leeds and Rockstar North, and published by Rockstar Games. The ninth installment in the Grand Theft Auto series, it was initially released as a PlayStation Portable exclusive in October 2005.
Release Date: October 24, 2005
Available Platforms: PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Apple iOS, and Android

Grand Theft Auto: Vice City Stories (2006)
Year: 2006
Description: Victor 'Vic' Vance, a former soldier, rises through multiple gangs in the dangerous world of Vice City in 1984.
Stars: Dorian Missick, Philip Michael Thomas, Lynda Ashe
Release Date: October 31, 2006
Available Platforms: PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 2, and PlayStation 3

Grand Theft Auto IV (2008) (GTA 4)
Year: 2008
Description: Niko Bellic arrives in Liberty City seeking the American Dream but gets entangled in crime to help his cousin.
Stars: Michael Hollick, Jason Zumwalt, Timothy Adams
Release Date: April 29, 2008
Available Platforms: Xbox 360, Xbox One, Xbox Series X, PlayStation 3, and PC

Grand Theft Auto IV: The Lost and Damned (2009) (GTA 4)
Year: 2009
Description: Johnny Klebitz, a biker, finds himself caught in a gang war as Billy Grey returns from rehab.
Stars: Scott Hill, Chris McKinney, Lou Sumrall
Release Date: February 17, 2009
Available Platforms: Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and PC


Grand Theft Auto IV: The Ballad of Gay Tony (2009) (GTA 4)
Year: 2009
Description: Luis Lopez helps his boss, Gay Tony, navigate the dangerous high life of Liberty City.
Stars: Mario D'Leon, David Kenner, Gregory Siff
Release Date: October 29, 2009
Available Platforms: Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and PC

Grand Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars (2009) (GTA Chinatown Wars)
Year: 2009
Description: Triad gangster Huang Lee arrives in Liberty City to return a family heirloom and avenge his father's murder.
Stars: Brett Barsky, Will Blagrove, Curtiss Cook
Release Date: March 17, 2009
Available Platforms: Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, Apple iOS, and Android

Grand Theft Auto V (2013)  (GTA 5)
Year: 2013
Description: Three criminals team up for a series of high-stakes heists in the crime-ridden city of Los Santos.
Stars: Shawn Fonteno, Ned Luke, Steven Ogg
Release Date: September 17, 2013
Available Platforms: PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Xbox Series X|S, and PC

Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy - The Definitive Edition (2021)
Description: Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy – The Definitive Edition is a 2021 compilation of three action-adventure games in the Grand Theft Auto series: Grand Theft Auto III, Grand Theft Auto: Vice City, and Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas.
Release Date: November 11, 2021
Available Platforms: PlayStation 5, PlayStation 4, Xbox Series X|S, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, PC, iOS, and Android

Grand Theft Auto VI (Upcoming)
Description: The latest installment in the Grand Theft Auto franchise, set in the state of Leonida, featuring Vice City and beyond.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
GTA 5 Missions 

You can access up to 74 missions in a single playthrough of GTA V, depending on your choices. Playing from the "Prologue" all the way to one of the three possible endings is required for 100% completion.

It is strongly advised to leave the 4 optional Assassination missions for last, until after the main storyline is completed, so that you can make the most money by the end of the game.

As GTA V introduces the ability to switch between three playable characters, for each GTA 5 mission below we show which of the three protagonists are involved, as well as the respective icon that appears on the map to start it.

GTA 5 Story Missions List:
The GTA 5 missions below are listed in chronological order - although some missions from different characters become available at the same time, so they can be played in a slightly different order.

Clicking on each GTA 5 mission brings you to its full details, with the mission guide, rewards, Gold Medal Objectives, Video Walkthrough, and more information.

GTA 5 Mission - Prologue

 1. Prologue
North Yankton, 9 years ago.
GTA 5 Mission - Franklin and Lamar
Map Blip Icon

 2. Franklin and Lamar
Franklin and Lamar repossess two convertibles for an Armenian car dealer, Simeon.
GTA 5 Mission - Repossession
Map Blip Icon

 3. Repossession
Franklin and Lamar go to a shady part of Vespucci Beach to repo a bike for Simeon.
GTA 5 Mission - Complications
Map Blip Icon

 4. Complications
Franklin heads to Rockford Hills to repo a car for Simeon.
GTA 5 Mission - Father/Son
Map Blip Icon

 5. Father/Son
Jimmy gets in trouble with some gangsters and calls Michael for help.
Note: To continue the storyline missions, you must now complete "Pulling Favors" (given to Franklin by Tonya), which is the first and only Strangers & Freaks mission required for story progression.

GTA 5 Mission - Chop
Map Blip Icon

 6. Chop
Lamar has a plan to make some extra cash.
GTA 5 Mission - Marriage Counseling
Map Blip Icon

 7. Marriage Counseling
Michael's marriage is on the rocks.
GTA 5 Mission - Daddy's Little Girl
Map Blip Icon

 8. Daddy's Little Girl
Michael and Jimmy pop out for some father/son bonding.
GTA 5 Mission - Friend Request
Map Blip Icon

 9. Friend Request
Michael needs a job and turns to an old friend for help.
GTA 5 Mission - The Long Stretch
Map Blip Icon

 10. The Long Stretch
Stretch has been released from prison, Lamar and Franklin take him out.
GTA 5 Mission - The Good Husband (Family Mission)

 11. The Good Husband (Family Mission)
OPTIONAL
Retrieve Amanda from shoplifting clothes and lose the cops.
GTA 5 Mission - Casing the Jewel Store
Map Blip Icon

 12. Casing the Jewel Store
Michael and Lester scout out a Jewellers in Little Portola.
Loud Approach
Smart Approach
GTA 5 Mission - Carbine Rifles
Map Blip Icon
 13. Carbine Rifles
GTA 5 Mission - Bugstars Equipment
Map Blip Icon
 13. Bugstars Equipment
GTA 5 Mission - BZ Gas Grenades
Map Blip Icon
 14. BZ Gas Grenades
GTA 5 Mission - The Jewel Store Job (Loud Approach)
Map Blip Icon
 15. The Jewel Store Job (Loud Approach)
In need of money to pay Madrazo, Michael takes down a Rockford Hills Jewel Store with Franklin and a crew.
GTA 5 Mission - The Jewel Store Job (Smart Approach)
Map Blip Icon
 15. The Jewel Store Job (Smart Approach)
In need of money to pay Madrazo, Michael takes down a Rockford Hills Jewel Store with Franklin and a crew.
GTA 5 Mission - Mr. Philips
Map Blip Icon

 16. Mr. Philips
Trevor has something to discuss with the Lost Motorcycle Club.
GTA 5 Mission - Trevor Philips Industries
Map Blip Icon

 17. Trevor Philips Industries
Trevor defends his cook house from a rival gang.
GTA 5 Mission - Nervous Ron
Map Blip Icon

 18. Nervous Ron
Trevor and Ron intercept a weapons shipment.
GTA 5 Mission - Crystal Maze
Map Blip Icon

 19. Crystal Maze
Trevor takes care of his business competition.
GTA 5 Mission - Friends Reunited
Map Blip Icon

 20. Friends Reunited
Trevor sets off for Los Santos.
GTA 5 Mission - Fame Or Shame
Map Blip Icon

 21. Fame Or Shame
Tracey auditions for Fame or Shame.
GTA 5 Mission - Dead Man Walking
Map Blip Icon

 22. Dead Man Walking
Agent Dave Norton puts Michael in a difficult situation.
GTA 5 Mission - Three's Company
Map Blip Icon

 23. Three's Company
Franklin and Trevor get roped into helping the FIB.
GTA 5 Mission - By the Book
Map Blip Icon

 24. By the Book
Michael and Trevor combine to locate a target for the FIB.
GTA 5 Mission - Hood Safari
Map Blip Icon

 25. Hood Safari
Franklin and Lamar show Trevor a typical South Los Santos neighborhood.
GTA 5 Mission - Did Somebody Say Yoga?
Map Blip Icon

 26. Did Somebody Say Yoga?
Michael finds his inner peace.
GTA 5 Mission - Scouting the Port
Map Blip Icon

 27. Scouting the Port
Trevor heads to the Port of LS to look for a job.
GTA 5 Mission - Minisub
Map Blip Icon

 28. Minisub
Get kitted up for for the Merryweather Heist.
Offshore Approach
Freighter Approach
GTA 5 Mission - Cargobob
Map Blip Icon
 29. Cargobob
GTA 5 Mission - The Merryweather Heist (Offshore)
Map Blip Icon
 30. The Merryweather Heist (Offshore)
Trevor brings Michael and Franklin on board to steal a prototype on a Merryweather Security-protected ship in the Port of LS.
GTA 5 Mission - The Merryweather Heist (Freighter)
Map Blip Icon
 30. The Merryweather Heist (Freighter)
Trevor brings Michael and Franklin on board to steal a prototype on a Merryweather Security-protected ship in the Port of LS.
GTA 5 Mission - The Hotel Assassination
Map Blip Icon

 31. The Hotel Assassination
Lester asks Franklin to take down Brett Lowrey, CEO of Bilkinton Research, who is staying at the Von Crastenburg Hotel.
GTA 5 Mission - Boiler Suits
Map Blip Icon

 32. Boiler Suits
Prep for an FIB operation.
GTA 5 Mission - Masks
Map Blip Icon

 33. Masks
Prep for an FIB operation.
GTA 5 Mission - Trash Truck
Map Blip Icon

 34. Trash Truck
Prep for an FIB operation.
GTA 5 Mission - Tow Truck
Map Blip Icon

 35. Tow Truck
Prep for an FIB operation.
GTA 5 Mission - Blitz Play
Map Blip Icon

 36. Blitz Play
The FIB need Michael, Trevor and Franklin to rob an armored car.
GTA 5 Mission - I Fought the Law...
Map Blip Icon

 37. I Fought the Law...
Franklin steals a Cheetah and an Entity XF for Devin.
GTA 5 Mission - Eye in the Sky
Map Blip Icon

 38. Eye in the Sky
Franklin and Trevor locate a Z-Type for Devin.
GTA 5 Mission - Mr. Richards
Map Blip Icon

 39. Mr. Richards
Michael gets his first job in the movie business.
GTA 5 Mission - Caida Libre
Map Blip Icon

 40. Caida Libre
Martin Madrazo needs a favor from Michael and Trevor.
GTA 5 Mission - Deep Inside
Map Blip Icon

 41. Deep Inside
Franklin boosts a JB 700 for Devin.
GTA 5 Mission - Minor Turbulence
Map Blip Icon

 42. Minor Turbulence
Trevor flies to intercept a cargo plane.
GTA 5 Mission - Paleto Score Setup
Map Blip Icon

 43. Paleto Score Setup
Michael, Lester and Trevor check out a bank in Paleto Bay.
GTA 5 Mission - Predator
Map Blip Icon

 44. Predator
Franklin, Trevor and Michael chase the O'Neil gang into the woods.
GTA 5 Mission - Military Hardware
Map Blip Icon

 45. Military Hardware
Prepare for the Paleto Score.
GTA 5 Mission - The Paleto Score
Map Blip Icon

 46. The Paleto Score
Michael, Franklin and Trevor take a well-protected holding bank in sleepy fishing village, Paleto Bay.
GTA 5 Mission - Derailed
Map Blip Icon

 47. Derailed
Michael and Trevor stage a train robbery.
GTA 5 Mission - Monkey Business
Map Blip Icon

 48. Monkey Business
Michael, Trevor and Franklin help the FIB save the country.
GTA 5 Mission - Hang Ten
Map Blip Icon

 49. Hang Ten
Trevor and Wade leave Floyd and Debra's condo.
GTA 5 Mission - Surveying the Score
Map Blip Icon

 50. Surveying the Score
Scope out the federal reserve in preparation for The Big Score.
GTA 5 Mission - Bury the Hatchet
Map Blip Icon

 51. Bury the Hatchet
Trevor and Michael take a trip down memory lane.
GTA 5 Mission - Pack Man
Map Blip Icon

 52. Pack Man
Franklin, Trevor and Lamar deliver Devin's cars to a drop-off point near Paleto Bay.
GTA 5 Mission - Fresh Meat
Map Blip Icon

 53. Fresh Meat
Michael's world gets turned upside down.
GTA 5 Mission - The Ballad of Rocco
Map Blip Icon

 54. The Ballad of Rocco
Michael helps out Solomon Richards.
GTA 5 Mission - Cleaning out the Bureau
Map Blip Icon

 55. Cleaning out the Bureau
The FIB want you to do one last job.
GTA 5 Mission - Architect's Plans
Map Blip Icon

 56. Architect's Plans
Prepare for the Bureau Raid.
Covert Approach
Roof Approach
GTA 5 Mission - Fire Truck
Map Blip Icon
 57. Fire Truck
GTA 5 Mission - The Bureau Raid (Fire Crew)
Map Blip Icon
 58. The Bureau Raid (Fire Crew)
Having started a fire in the FIB headquarters, Michael and Franklin go in as firemen to perform a data theft.
GTA 5 Mission - The Bureau Raid (Roof Entry)
Map Blip Icon
 58. The Bureau Raid (Roof Entry)
Michael and Franklin parachute onto the FIB headquarters to infiltrate their network and perform a data theft.
GTA 5 Mission - The Wrap Up
Map Blip Icon

 59. The Wrap Up
Michael has a meeting with the FIB.
GTA 5 Mission - Reuniting the Family
Map Blip Icon

 60. Reuniting the Family
Michael begins to make amends with his family.
GTA 5 Mission - Doting Dad (Family Mission)

 61. Doting Dad (Family Mission)
OPTIONAL
Find Tracey's stalker and deal with him.
GTA 5 Mission - Legal Trouble
Map Blip Icon

 62. Legal Trouble
Michael tries to protect the Movie Studio.
GTA 5 Mission - Lamar Down
Map Blip Icon

 63. Lamar Down
Lamar's in trouble and needs help.
GTA 5 Mission - Meltdown
Map Blip Icon

 64. Meltdown
Michael attends the Meltdown premiere.
GTA 5 Mission - Parenting 101 (Family Mission)

 65. Parenting 101 (Family Mission)
OPTIONAL
Rescue Jimmy from his kidnappers.
GTA 5 Mission - Planning The Big Score
Map Blip Icon

 66. Planning The Big Score
Set plans to rob the Union Depository.
Subtle Approach
Obvious Approach
GTA 5 Mission - Stingers
Map Blip Icon
 67. Stingers
GTA 5 Mission - Sidetracked
Map Blip Icon
 67. Sidetracked
GTA 5 Mission - Gauntlet (1-3)
Map Blip Icon
 68. Gauntlet (1-3)
GTA 5 Mission - Driller
Map Blip Icon
 68. Driller
GTA 5 Mission - The Big Score (Subtle Approach)
Map Blip Icon
 69. The Big Score (Subtle Approach)
Michael and Trevor con their way into the Union Depository and walk out with the gold reserves. Franklin organises the getaway.
GTA 5 Mission - The Big Score (Obvious Approach)
Map Blip Icon
 69. The Big Score (Obvious Approach)
While Michael causes a distraction at the Union Depository, Franklin and Trevor empty the vault of the gold reserves.
GTA V Last Mission: Endings
Grand Theft Auto V has three possible endings that you can choose from, each with significantly different outcomes for the GTA 5 last mission.

It has been confirmed that Ending C (Deathwish) is the canon ending of GTA V, and it's recommended to choose it if you don't want to lose access to one of the main characters.

GTA 5 Mission - Something Sensible (Ending A)
Map Blip Icon

 70. Something Sensible (Ending A)
Franklin has to make a choice. WARNING: If you pick this ending, you will permanently lose access to Trevor from this point forward.
GTA 5 Mission - The Time's Come (Ending B)
Map Blip Icon

 70. The Time's Come (Ending B)
Franklin has to make a choice. WARNING: If you pick this ending, you will permanently lose access to Michael from this point forward.
GTA 5 Mission - The Third Way (Ending C)
Map Blip Icon

 70. The Third Way (Ending C)
Michael, Franklin, and Trevor take down all their enemies: ambush FIB agents and Merryweather mercenaries at the foundry in Murrieta Heights, then target Wei Cheng, Stretch, Steve Haines and Devin Wes...
Lester's Assassinations (Side Missions)
The following are the GTA V's Assassination Missions given by Lester Crest to Franklin. Only the first ("The Hotel Assassination") is required for story progression, which is why it's also listed as a main story mission above.

The other four Assassinations are optional, and it's strongly advised to play them after finishing the main storyline, in order to make the most profit out of the stock market investment.

GTA 5 Mission - The Hotel Assassination
Map Blip Icon

 1. The Hotel Assassination
Lester asks Franklin to take down Brett Lowrey, CEO of Bilkinton Research, who is staying at the Von Crastenburg Hotel.
GTA 5 Mission - The Multi Target Assassination
Map Blip Icon

 2. The Multi Target Assassination
Lester tasks Franklin to take down four corrupt jurors that are planning to throw a class-action lawsuit against Redwood Cigarettes.
GTA 5 Mission - The Vice Assassination
Map Blip Icon

 3. The Vice Assassination
Franklin must find and kill Jackson Skinner, the head of product development at Facade. 
GTA 5 Mission - The Bus Assassination
Map Blip Icon

 4. The Bus Assassination
Lester asks Franklin to assassinate a man called Isaac Penny, who is about to take a controlling share in the Vapid Motor Company. 
GTA 5 Mission - The Construction Assassination
Map Blip Icon

 5. The Construction Assassination
In the last Assassination, Lester tells Franklin to take down Enzo Bonelli, a mafia member turned real estate developer. 
Note: Even though Lester's Assassination Missions are optional (not required for story progression), they're still counted under the main "Missions" checklist, and they're still needed for 100% completion of the game.

How many missions are in GTA 5?
Despite the GTA V in-game statistics stating that the game has 69 missions, there are actually many more missions available, with branching paths and three possible endings. 

There are actually 83 available story missions in total in GTA 5, which you can find all listed on this page. However, due to the branching nature of Heist approaches, only 74 missions are played in a single playthrough, while the others can be accessed by selecting different paths.

So why does the game's checklist show "only" 69 missions instead of 74? Well, Rockstar has decided to not include the "Fire Truck" and "BZ Gas Grenades" heist setups in their listing, and they also don't count the 3 optional "Family Missions" that Micheal can do. This is probably so they could make a reference to the "69" number on purpose, in typical Rockstar fashion.

What do Mission Icon Colors mean in GTA 5?
Since GTA V features three playable protagonists, the game indicates with unique colors on the map the missions that can be started by the different characters:

A blue icon on the map shows missions that can be started by Michael
A green icon on the map shows missions that can be started by Franklin
An orange icon on the map icon shows missions that can be started by Trevor
If you see a question mark on the map, it's a Strangers & Freaks side mission.
You can also see the number of missions currently available for each protagonist when switching between them via the Character Wheel.

How to Replay Missions in GTA 5
Grand Theft Auto V features mission scoring, with specific objectives (such as time, damage, accuracy, etc.) required to achieve the Gold Medal in a mission.

Just completing a mission will give you a Bronze Medal by default. You earn a Silver Medal by meeting at least one objective, but you must complete 100% of the objectives to earn a Gold Medal.

To improve your score, you can replay the missions you already completed, by accessing the Pause Menu and going to the "Game" tab.

It's important to note that you can complete each Gold Medal requirement in multiple playthroughs of the mission - you don't need to obtain them all in one single playthrough.

Earning at least 70 Gold Medals between Missions and Strangers & Freaks is required for the "Solid Gold, Baby!" Achievement / Trophy.

How to Play All Endings in GTA 5
If you would like to play all three endings in Grand Theft Auto V in a single playthrough, and experience what each ending has to offer, the game allows you to do so.

After completing one of the endings, you will find the ability to play the two other endings by accessing the Pause Menu, going to "Game" > Replay Mission", and scrolling all the way to the bottom.

However, this won't change the original choice you made during the course of the playthrough.

If you're unsure on what ending to choose, it's advised to first make a save in a separate slot after completing "The Big Score" mission. At this point, you are free to experiment with choosing and playing any of the three endings, knowing that you always have a previously saved game that you can return to choose a different ending.

Unless you want to lose access to Michael or Trevor after the end of the story, we strongly recommend choosing Ending C (Deathwish), as that's also been confirmed to be the canon ending of the game.

More GTA 5 Side Missions
In addition to the main GTA 5 Story Mode, GTA V also features other optional side missions and activities that can be played.

These include Strangers & Freaks missions, which involve interesting characters that Michael, Franklin, or Trevor can encounter outside the main story.

There are also many Hobbies & Pastimes and Random Events that you can take part in if you want to fully complete the game.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Grand Theft Auto (1997)
Intro:
Grand Theft Auto is an action-adventure game developed by DMA Design and published by BMG Interactive. It is the first game in the Grand Theft Auto series and was released in November 1997 for MS-DOS and Windows, in December 1997 for the PlayStation and in October 1999 for the Game Boy Color. The game's narrative follows a criminal who climbs in status within the criminal underworld across three fictional cities, inspired by real-life locations. The gameplay is presented from a top-down perspective and takes place within an open-world environment in which the player is required to gather a certain number of points ranging in the millions to progress through the game's chapters. Points are gathered by completing various missions throughout each city, although the player can gather the points through other means as well.
Grand Theft Auto began development as Race 'n' Chase, in which the player controlled a police officer pursuing criminals. However, the game was considered dull, and the concept of playing as a criminal was adopted.[1] The development team worked to ensure that the player would have the freedom to play however they intend. Grand Theft Auto created a great deal of controversy even before its launch due to its violent content, with discussions taking place about banning its sale.[2] The marketing campaign, organised by publicist Max Clifford, exploited this stirring of controversy as free promotion.[3][4][5]
Grand Theft Auto received mixed reviews but was a commercial success. While the graphics and controls were criticised, the entertainment value, sound design and freedom of the gameplay were praised, and has since been recognised as one of the greatest games of all time. Two expansions taking place in 1960s England, Grand Theft Auto: London 1969 and Grand Theft Auto: London 1961, were launched in 1999. The success of Grand Theft Auto spawned a series of games which built upon the original's gameplay and themes; the Grand Theft Auto series has since become one of the most popular and best-selling video game franchises of all time. Grand Theft Auto 2 was released in October 1999.

Gameplay:
Grand Theft Auto is made up of six levels split between three main cities; each locale is based on a real-life city in the United States, with an alternative name: Liberty City (New York City), San Andreas (San Francisco), and Vice City (Miami). The progression is linear, as each level completed automatically unlocks the next one in the chain. Players begin a game choosing a character from among eight—four in the PlayStation version—and naming them, though the choice is purely aesthetic, and does not affect the overall gameplay.[6] In each level, the player's ultimate objective is to reach a target number of points, which starts at $1,000,000 but becomes higher in the later levels,[7] and then reach the level's "goal" to complete the stage. The player is free to do whatever they want,[8] but have limited lives upon doing so. Points can be gained from anything, such as causing death and destruction amid the traffic in the city, completing special challenges, or stealing and selling cars for profit. However, the more typical means to achieve their target is to perform tasks for the level's local crime syndicate. Jobs can be initiated by visiting and touching a ringing telephone box, with each level's set of jobs on offer being unique.[7]
Jobs can be completed in any order, and each has some level of freedom to how it is successfully completed, though destinations in each are fixed. Successful completion of a job awards the player points, unlocks harder missions with greater rewards, and provides a "multiplier"—a bonus that increases the value of points earned from completing jobs and actions. Failing a job by not completing objectives, being arrested or dying, secures no points and can seal off other tasks in the chain. Players can find equipment across the level's map to help them with jobs and making points, including weapons and body armour, the latter increasing the player's survival against attacks from enemies. If the player is killed (referred to in the game as "Wasted"), they lose a life, lose all their current equipment, and have their multiplier bonus reset; losing all their lives will result in players having to restart a level. Law enforcement is present at each level, and committing criminal actions will cause the player to raise their notoriety with the police; the higher the level, the tougher the response. If the player is arrested, they forfeit all equipment, and have their multiplier bonus halved.[9]
PC versions of the game were released with networked multiplayer gameplay using the IPX protocol.

Plot:
- Characters:
he player can choose between eight protagonists to control at the beginning of the game, though this choice has no effect on the gameplay or story. The player character interacts with prominent criminals throughout the story: Robert "Bubby" Seragliano is the supposed head of the notorious Vercotti crime family and is driven to avenge his father's death; Uncle Fu is the ancient leader of a Chinese gang in conflict with a Latino gang led by El Burro; Samuel Deever is a corrupt Vice City police officer suspected of several crimes; and Brother Marcus is the leader of the Brotherhood of Jah Army of Love and the biggest drug dealer in Vice City.

- Story:
The protagonist begins their career in Liberty City working for Robert "Bubby" Seragliano's gang. After completing a number of jobs, they are warned by a rival gang that their actions are causing great harm to their boss, Sonetti. The protagonist continues working for Seragliano and kills Sonetti. After more work, Bubby praises the protagonist's efforts, but warns that the police are surrounding the gang and it would be a good idea for them to leave town.
As soon as the protagonist arrives in San Andreas they are contacted by Uncle Fu's gang and begin working for them. After doing some work for the gang, they meet in person with Fu, who expresses his gratitude for his services and states that their actions have brought honor to the family. The protagonist enters the service of El Burro. Again, after several jobs the protagonist meets the grateful boss in person, who sends them to Vice City.
The protagonist's actions catch the attention of corrupt police officer Samuel Deever, who claims to have evidence that could condemn them to life imprisonment and blackmails them into working for him. The cycle repeats itself and the two meet in person, with Deever warning the protagonist to be careful with their actions. They then start working for the Rastafarians until they meet their leader Brother Marcus, who believes that the protagonist did an excellent job, but that they will not see each other again.

- development:
The development of Grand Theft Auto began on 4 April 1995 at DMA Design in Dundee. It originally had a protracted four-year development, which included a title change and numerous attempts to halt development.[11]
The game was originally titled Race'n'Chase.[12] It was originally planned to be released on MS-DOS, Windows 95, PlayStation, Sega Saturn and the Nintendo 64. However, it was never released for the two latter consoles. During the development of Grand Theft Auto, many people overseeing the game's progress attempted to halt the development, which led the crew at DMA Design to have to convince them to allow them to continue.[11]
There were specific milestones planned for Grand Theft Auto, none of which were met:[11]
Development begins: 4 April 1995
Complete game design: 31 May 1995
Engine: 3 July 1995
Look and feel: 2 October 1995
First play: 3 January 1996
Alpha: 1 April 1996
End of production: 1 July 1996
An original design document, dated 22 March 1995, was posted online by Mike Dailly on 22 March 2011.[13][14][15] The credited author of the document is K.R. Hamilton, and the released version is 1.05. It contained information about elements of the game discussed in various meetings held from 23 January 1995 to the writing of the document.
According to the original design document, the introduction to Grand Theft Auto is a pre-drawn/rendered animation. The Windows 95 version was developed using Visual C++ v2.0. The DOS version was developed using Watcom C/C++ v10, Microsoft MASM 6.1 and Rational Systems DOS extender (DOS4GW) v 1.97. The program used to make Grand Theft Auto was said to produce "a 3D array which can [be] used by both the perspective and the isometric engines". It was said to consist of "a grid editor which is used to place blocks on a grid, with a [separate] grid for each level", and "allow any block to be placed at any level". It was said that the world may have had to be 256×256×6 blocks.
The original concept of Grand Theft Auto was "to produce a fun, addictive and fast multi-player car racing and crashing game which uses a novel graphics method".
David Jones, the game's producer, cited Pac-Man as an influence. He noted that the player runs over pedestrians and gets chased by police in a similar manner to Pac-Man.[16]
Gary Penn, creative director of DMA at the time, cited Elite as a major influence, "But I'd been working on Frontier, which is very different and there were definitely other people on the team who had things like Syndicate, Mercenary and Elite very much in their minds as well. That combination definitely led to the more open plan structure there is now. The game as it stands now is basically Elite in a city, but without quite the same sense of taking on the jobs. You take on the jobs in a slightly different way, but incredibly similar structurally. It's just a much more acceptable real world setting. The game was cops and robbers and then that evolved fairly quickly—nobody wants to be the cop, it's more fun to be bad. And then that evolved into Grand Theft Auto".[17]
In an early 1997 interview, project leader Keith Hamilton commented, "GTA was harder than we thought. We're rewriting the handling of the cars at the moment. We've got the time as we're changing the graphics to 24-bit.

- release
The original Grand Theft Auto was developed for MS-DOS, but then later ported to Windows (using SciTech MGL), PlayStation (developed by Visual Sciences using their "ViSOS" framework),[19] and Game Boy Color.[citation needed] The MS-DOS and Windows versions were published in Europe by BMG Interactive on 28 November 1997,[20][21][22] followed by the PlayStation version on 12 December 1997.[23] In North America, the game was published by ASC Games for MS-DOS and Windows on 24 March 1998,[24][25] and by Take-Two Interactive for the PlayStation on 30 June 1998.[26] The Game Boy Color version, developed by Tarantula Studios, was published by Rockstar Games in Europe on 22 October 1999, and in North America in November.[27]
The Game Boy Color version was technologically unabridged, which was quite a technical achievement[original research?] due to the sheer size of the cities, converted tile-for-tile from the PC original, making them many times larger than most Game Boy Color game worlds were because of the handheld's limited hardware. To cater for the target younger demographic, however, the game was heavily toned down, with gore and swearing removed.[citation needed] The PC version comes in several different executables for DOS and MS-Windows, which use a single set of data files (except for the 8-bit colour DOS version which uses different but similar graphics). It was previously available as a free download as part of the Rockstar Classics (alongside Wild Metal and Grand Theft Auto 2); however, the free download service is currently unavailable.[28]
Grand Theft Auto was to be released on the Sega Saturn, but due to the console's rapid decline in popularity before development was finished, the project was halted and the game was never released.[citation needed] After the PlayStation's successful release, development began on Grand Theft Auto 64, a port of the game for the Nintendo 64, rumoured to have graphical enhancements and new missions. However, development was cancelled without ever having a public appearance.[29]
In March 2001, Take-Two Interactive announced Global Star Software would publish a version of the game for PalmPilot by the holiday season in Europe and North America;[30][31][32][33] Global Star released a demo for Palm OS on its website.[34] According to fansite Gouranga!, the project was cancelled by June 2002.

- cover art
The UK cover art for Grand Theft Auto is a photograph of a New York Police Department 1980s Plymouth Gran Fury rushing through the intersection of Fifth Avenue and 56th Street, with Trump Tower in the background of the picture. Several alternate box arts were released for different regions, including the artwork for the PC release in the US which features a yellow car, the European PC and PlayStation releases exhibiting the design used in later iterations of the series, and several Japanese covers including one featuring the Statue of Liberty.[36][37][38] The UK cover art was also an alternative cover for Grand Theft Auto 2 in selected markets.

Soundtrack:
The freedom of the game's open world led the DMA team to believe that players would like to listen to different music while driving around the city, and so came up with the idea of several radio stations that would play music from various genres. Three DMA members – Colin Anderson, Craig Conner, and Grant Middleton – composed the radio tracks and recorded them at night in the company's offices. Grand Theft Auto features seven radio stations and a police band track. All can be heard when the player enters a vehicle; however, each vehicle only receives a limited number of stations. Players can remove the game's CD when it has finished loading and replace it with another one with their own music. When the character enters a car, the game randomly plays music from the CD. The game's main theme was composed by Conner and credited to the fictional band Da Shootaz. With the exception of Head Radio, the names of songs and radio stations are never mentioned within the game.

Reception:
The game received mixed reviews.[42][41] GameSpot's 1998 review for Grand Theft Auto said that, although the graphics may look "a little plain", the music and sound effects are the opposite, praising the radio stations and the sound effects used to open and close vehicles. They also praised the freedom of the game, favouring it over other games that make the player follow a specific rule set and complete specific missions in a specific order.[46]
IGN were critical of the graphics which were said to be "really quite shoddy" and dated. They were also unimpressed by the "fast-food programming and careless design", including the controls. Overall the game was considered to be fun but with problems which could have been fixed.[47]
Next Generation reviewed the PC version of the game, rating it four stars out of five, and stated that "It is quite easy to accuse Grand Theft Auto of being all style and no substance, but the charge doesn't stick. Of course, we don't condone the acts within, but there is no denying that the game itself is well-executed and quite enjoyable."[44] Grand Theft Auto was banned by the Justice Ministry of Brazil; at the time, Brazil was confronting homicides and fatal auto accidents.[48]
Grand Theft Auto has been named one of the greatest video games by several publications.[49][50][51][52][53][54]

-sales:
Global shipments to retailers of Grand Theft Auto's computer and PlayStation versions had surpassed 1 million units combined by November 1998.[55][56] At the 1999 Milia festival in Cannes, it took home a "Gold" prize for revenues above €17 million in the European Union during 1998.[57] The game maintained a top-20 position on the UK charts for at least 76 weeks, rising to the second-highest position in May 1999 after the release of London 1969.[58][59] It sold 3.5 million units by October 1999,[60] and 6 million by March 2001.[61]

Review Scores:
publications                                Score
Computer and Video Games	                7/10
Electronic Gaming Monthly	                6.5/10
GamePro	                                    2/5
GameRevolution	                            B
GameSpot(PC)                                6.4/10
GameSpot(PS)                                8/10
IGN	                                        6/10
Next Generation	                            4/5
Nintendo Power	                            6.2/10
PlayStation Official Magazine – UK	(PS)    7/10

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Grand Theft Auto 2
Intro:
Grand Theft Auto 2 is an action-adventure game developed by DMA Design and published by Rockstar Games in October 1999 for the PlayStation and Windows, and the Dreamcast and Game Boy Color in 2000. It is the sequel to 1997's Grand Theft Auto, and the second main entry in the Grand Theft Auto series. Set within a retrofuturistic metropolis known as "Anywhere City", the game focuses on players taking the role of a criminal as they roam an open world, conducting jobs for various crime syndicates and having free rein to do whatever they wish to achieve their goal. The game's intro is unique for a title in the series, as it involved live-action scenes filmed by Rockstar Games.
Grand Theft Auto 2 received mixed reviews for most platforms, and negative reviews for the Game Boy Color, but was a moderate commercial success. While the soundtrack and some gameplay elements, such as the gang loyalty system, were praised, the graphics, controls, and setting received a more mixed game response. The game was also criticised for failing to innovate the formula established by its predecessor, despite several improvements it brought. Grand Theft Auto 2 was followed by 2001's Grand Theft Auto III, which started a new era for the series, while the game itself was re-released on Steam in January 2008.[1]

Gameplay:
Players begin a game with only one character—six in the Game Boy Color version. Like its predecessor Grand Theft Auto, the game focuses on players completing a series of levels, each requiring a set target score being achieved to progress to the next stage. Points are awarded from various criminal actions such as destroying cars, selling vehicles, and completing missions for various crime syndicates, with the latter awarding more points than doing simple criminal actions. Creating chaos from their crimes will cause the player to be wanted by the police who will hound the player to arrest or kill them, with higher wanted levels increasing the level of response used. Being arrested or dying loses the player any equipment they found, and impacts their multiplier bonus.
Grand Theft Auto 2's setting is unique for the series: a retrofuturistic metropolis referred to as "Anywhere, USA",[2] which is divided into three districts (Downtown, Residential, and Industrial) that players will switch between as they progress through the game. The time period the game is set in is not specified—conflicting sources suggest anything from "three weeks into the future",[3] to the year being 2013,[2] despite in-game references to the "new millenium" that is coming (implying the game takes place around its time of release, in 1999).
The game introduced several features and improvements to the series. Players can save their game during a playthrough of a level by visiting the church they start at, but must pay a set number of points to do so. Jobs on offer come from three different syndicates—each level features two unique syndicates, alongside a third syndicate present in all levels. By doing jobs for a syndicate and successfully completing them, the player gains respect with that syndicate, allowing them to take on tougher jobs with enough respect, but lose it with their chief rivals, locking them out of their jobs and making the syndicate's members hostile to the player. Other improvements include vehicles and pedestrians being more interactive with the game's environment—such as gang members engaging in fights with police—the presence of other criminals (such as muggers),[4] a health meter, garages that can modify vehicles with special improvements, a selection of side missions ranging from running a taxi to driving a semi-truck, and groups of 'hidden' packages to find across the level.

Development:
Grand Theft Auto 2 was developed by DMA Design in Dundee under the lead programmer Keith Hamilton. The team initially intended to call the game Eh Stole E' Motur but later believed this name could hamper the game's international appeal.[5]
Grand Theft Auto 2 was released for the PlayStation and Windows on 22 October 1999.[6][7] More than 1.2 million copies of the game were shipped to retailers worldwide upon release, expected to contribute over US$33 million in gross revenue.[8] It was released for the Dreamcast on 1 May 2000 in North America[9] and 20 May in Europe.[10] A Game Boy Color version, developed by Tarantula Studios, was released in December 2000.

GTA 2 - The Movie:
The game was developed with an eight-minute short film of live-action footage, filmed within New York City. The short film was devised as an introductory sequence for the game, and was made available on Rockstar Games's website. The film follows a criminal named Claude Speed (played by Scott Maslen),[a] who conducts jobs around Anywhere City for several criminal syndicates, until his actions eventually catch up and he is killed by an assassin from one of the gangs he robbed. The film was based on a screenplay by Dan Houser, and directed by Alex De Rakoff.

Soundtrack:
Each area features five radio stations from a pool of eleven, one of which is heard as the player drives most vehicles in-game. Changing radio stations for preference is possible. "Head Radio" was present in the original Grand Theft Auto, Grand Theft Auto III and Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories. Each gang has its own radio station that transmits within a limited area. Police vehicles, ambulances, fire trucks and tanks had no ability to listen to the radio channels. Instead, the player would hear the radio transmitter of the emergency services.
All the music and the ads included in the game are exclusive, following the tradition of previous games. People in charge of the musical content were Craig Conner, Stuart Ross, Paul Scargill, Colin Anderson, Bert Reid and Moving Shadow. Some of these producers would keep their work on subsequent GTA releases.[citation needed]
The Game Boy Color version uses some real songs, one of which is a sped up version of "Back in Black" by AC/DC. The Character Selection theme is an old Brazilian song titled "Chega de Saudade"

Reception:
Grand Theft Auto 2's computer version received a "Silver" sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association (ELSPA),[23] indicating sales of at least 100,000 copies in the United Kingdom.[24] The game's PlayStation version received a "Platinum" sales award (300,000 or more units in the United Kingdom) from ELSPA.[25]
Grand Theft Auto 2 was released to mixed reviews.[16] The game's graphics received mixed reactions from critics, who noted that they had barely any difference to the graphics in the original game. IGN's Tal Blevins called them "average at best", and that the scenery is "hard to appreciate".[4] Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot said that the "graphics look a bit plain."[26] The game's soundtrack received positive feedback, with Gerstmann calling it a "great soundtrack", and that it "closely [mirrors] the station-style of the original game".[26] IGN's Blevins called it "one of the best features" of the game.[4]
Grand Theft Auto 2's gameplay elements received mixed reactions. IGN's Jeremy Dunham said that the gameplay is "where the game really takes a punch to the stomach", and that it "could've been a lot better."[27] Tal Blevins called it "simple, but effective."[4] Jeff Gerstmann said that "even though the gameplay is largely the same as in the previous GTA, it's still a lot of fun."[26] Edge highlighted the game's story development and inventive missions, stating that Grand Theft Auto 2 "manages to draw you deep into the complexities of its world".[21]
Blake Fischer reviewed the Dreamcast version of the game for Next Generation, rating it two stars out of five, and stated that it is "A great idea that, for one reason or another, never really gets into a must-play game."[22]
The Game Boy Color version received negative reviews. Craig Harris of IGN wrote, "I appreciate the desire to try and move games from the higher platforms to the Game Boy Color, but jeez, Grand Theft Auto 2? The first one was bad enough. I will take this time to plead with Rockstar Games - just say no to GTA on GBA."

Review Scores:
publications                            Score
Computer and Video Games	            4/5
Edge	                                8/10
GameSpot	                            6.9/10 (PS1)
GameSpot                                6.9/10 (DC)
GameSpot                                6.8/10 (PC)
IGN	                                    7.3/10 (PC)
IGN                                     6.8/10 (PS1)
IGN                                     6.7/10 (DC)
Next Generation	                        2/5

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Grand Theft Auto III

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Grand Theft Auto III
A collage of various characters and scenarios from the game
North American cover art
Developer(s)	DMA Design[a]
Publisher(s)	Rockstar Games       
Producer(s)	Leslie Benzies
Programmer(s)	
Obbe Vermeij
Adam Fowler
Artist(s)	Aaron Garbut
Writer(s)	
James Worrall
Paul Kurowski
Dan Houser
Composer(s)	
Craig Conner
Stuart Ross
Series	Grand Theft Auto
Engine	RenderWare
Platform(s)	
PlayStation 2
Release	
23 October 2001
Genre(s)	Action-adventure
Mode(s)	Single-player
Grand Theft Auto III is a 2001 action-adventure game developed by DMA Design and published by Rockstar Games. It was the first 3D game in the Grand Theft Auto series. Set in Liberty City, loosely based on New York City, the story follows Claude, a silent protagonist who becomes entangled in a world of crime, drugs, gang warfare and corruption. The game is played from a third-person perspective and its world is navigated on foot or by vehicle. Its open world design lets players freely roam Liberty City.

Development was shared between DMA Design, based in Edinburgh, and Rockstar, based in New York City. Development involved transforming popular Grand Theft Auto elements into a fully 3D world for the first time. The game was delayed following the September 11 attacks to allow the team to change references and gameplay deemed inappropriate. Grand Theft Auto III was released in October 2001 for the PlayStation 2, in May 2002 for Windows, and in November 2003 for the Xbox. Mobile ports were released for the tenth anniversary in 2011, followed by a remastered version for the twentieth in 2021.

Grand Theft Auto III received acclaim for its concept, gameplay, sound design, and visual fidelity, but generated controversies for its violence and sex. It received year-end accolades from several gaming publications, and it is considered a landmark game in the open world concept, one of the most significant games of the sixth generation of consoles, and among the best video games. It was the best-selling video game of 2001 and among the best-selling PlayStation 2 games with over 11.6 million copies sold; it has sold over 14.5 million copies overall. The game was followed by Grand Theft Auto: Vice City (2002) and two prequels, Advance (2004) and Liberty City Stories (2005).

Gameplay

Players can freely roam the game's world and have the ability to use weapons to accomplish tasks.
Grand Theft Auto III is an action-adventure game played from a third-person perspective. Players complete missions—linear scenarios with set objectives—to progress through the story.[4] It is possible to have several missions available at a time, as some missions require players to wait for further instructions or events.[5] Outside of missions, players can freely roam the open world and complete optional side missions. They begin in the borough of Portland, and unlocks Staunton Island and Shoreside Vale as they progress in the storyline.[6]

Players may run, jump or use vehicles to navigate the game world.[7] In combat, auto-aim can be used as assistance against enemies.[8] Should players take damage, their health meter can be fully regenerated through the use of health pick-ups. Body armour can be used to absorb gunshots and explosive damage, but is used up in the process.[9] When health is entirely depleted, gameplay stops and players respawn at the nearest hospital, at the expense of losing armour, weapons, and an amount of money.[10]

If players commit crimes while playing, the game's law enforcement agencies may respond as indicated by a "wanted" meter in the head-up display (HUD). On the meter, the displayed stars indicate the current wanted level[11] (for example, at the maximum six-star level, efforts by law enforcement to incapacitate players become very aggressive).[12] Law enforcement officers will search for players who leave the wanted vicinity. The wanted meter enters a cooldown mode and eventually recedes when players are hidden from the officers' line of sight.[11]

The game lets players control the mute criminal Claude.[13] Throughout the story, Claude meets various players from the criminal underworld. As players complete missions for different gangs and criminal organisations, fellow gang members will often defend players, while rival gang members will recognise players and subsequently shoot on sight.[14] While free roaming the game world, players may engage in activities such as a vigilante minigame, a firefighting activity, a paramedic service and a taxi cab service.[11][15] Completion of these activities grants players with context-specific rewards; for example, completing the vigilante mission allows players to bribe police after committing a crime.[16]


Combat in Grand Theft Auto III was reworked to allow players to perform drive-by shootings by viewing sideways in a car.
Players use melee attacks, firearms and explosives to fight enemies. The firearms include weapons such as the Micro Uzi, an M16 rifle and a flamethrower.[6] The game's three-dimensional environment allows a first-person view while aiming with the sniper rifle, rocket launcher and the M16 rifle. In addition, the game's combat was reworked to allow players to commit drive-by shootings by facing sideways in a vehicle.[4] The game gives players a wide variety of weapon options—they can be purchased from local firearms dealers, found on the ground, retrieved from dead enemies, or found around the city.[9]

Plot
Small-time criminal Claude is betrayed and shot by his girlfriend Catalina (voiced by Cynthia Farrell) during a bank heist outside Liberty City. Claude is arrested but escapes during his transfer to prison when members of the Colombian Cartel ambush his transport to abduct another prisoner. During his escape, Claude befriends explosives expert and fellow convict 8-Ball (Guru), who shelters Claude and introduces him to the Leone Mafia family for work. Claude assists the Mafia with various operations, including winning a gang war against a local group of Triads, earning him the respect of Don Salvatore Leone (Frank Vincent). After learning the Cartel are creating and selling a new street drug called SPANK to fund their expansion into Liberty City, Salvatore orders Claude to destroy their floating drug lab. Claude accomplishes this with 8-Ball's help.

Salvatore later instructs Claude to deal with a minor problem, but his trophy wife Maria (Debi Mazar), who took a liking to Claude, reveals it to be a set-up. Maria claims she lied to Salvatore about having an affair with Claude to make him jealous, and now Salvatore wants to kill him. Claude escapes to Staunton Island with Maria and her friend Asuka Kasen (Lianna Pai). After killing Salvatore to cut ties with the Mafia, Claude begins working for the yakuza, led by Asuka and her brother Kenji (Les J.N. Mau). During this time, he also provides assistance to corrupt police inspector Ray Machowski (Robert Loggia), whom he eventually helps flee the city, and influential businessman Donald Love (Kyle MacLachlan). Donald hires Claude to kill Kenji under the guise of a Cartel attack to start a gang war to allow Donald to obtain construction sites for his businesses. After the job's success, Claude carries out another task for Donald that leads him to encounter Catalina, now the leader of the Cartel, at a construction site. However, Catalina escapes after betraying and shooting her partner, Miguel (Al Espinosa).

Asuka blames the Cartel for Kenji's death and seizes the construction site. The yakuza capture the wounded Miguel and torture him for information on Cartel operations in the city, allowing Claude to strike against them and hinder the Cartel. Enraged, Catalina murders both Asuka and Miguel and kidnaps Maria, demanding $500,000 for her release. Claude meets with her to pay the ransom, but Catalina deceives him again and traps him. Claude escapes, rescues Maria, and destroys the helicopter Catalina attempts to flee in, killing her. As Claude and Maria leave the scene, Maria begins to complain about the kidnapping, but is silenced by a gunshot.[b]

Development
A middle-aged man looking towards the camera.
Leslie Benzies
A bald middle-aged man smiling at the camera.
Dan Houser
A middle-aged man with brown hair and a bushy brown beard smiling at the camera.
Sam Houser
Benzies produced the game alongside Dan Houser, who also co-wrote the story. Sam Houser, president of Rockstar Games, executive-produced the game.
The core development team of Grand Theft Auto III consisted of about 23 people at DMA Design in Edinburgh, who worked closely with publisher Rockstar Games in New York City.[6] The original tech demo was created on Sega's Dreamcast around the end of development on Grand Theft Auto 2 (1999).[17] Rockstar had been pressuring its teams to create a 3D open world, and the DMA group who developed Space Station Silicon Valley (1998) began working on a project separate from the Grand Theft Auto 2 team. Alan Jack, a DMA support engineer, described it as combining Body Harvest's (1998) exploration with Space Station Silicon Valley's city level.[18]

The team chose against using the Grand Theft Auto branding to avoid conflict with the Grand Theft Auto 2 team and began developing their game as a Godzilla project. After Take-Two Interactive acquired DMA from Infogrames in September 1999, the Space Station Silicon Valley and Grand Theft Auto 2 teams were combined. The combined team began developing Grand Theft Auto III for the Dreamcast, but shifted to the PlayStation 2 after four months. Technical director Obbe Vermeij said the shift was not due to hardware constraints, but because it became clear the Dreamcast was not commercially viable. He described the decision as disappointing, noting the DMA Design staff were big fans of Phantasy Star Online (2000).[18]

During the Dreamcast phase, DMA Design developed city blocks with brownstones, docks, and retail areas, alongside vehicles and pedestrians.[18] By early 2001, the team had designed the city, cars and some weapons.[19] Producer Leslie Benzies described Grand Theft Auto III as a "crime simulation game".[6] Rockstar offered Grand Theft Auto III to Microsoft Game Studios as an Xbox exclusive, but Microsoft declined due to its adult nature and poorly-performing predecessors.[20][21] The game was released for the PlayStation 2 on 23 October 2001 in North America.[22][23][24] When porting the game to Windows, the team delayed it from the PlayStation 2 release in order to ensure quality, citing issues with the simultaneous platform release of previous Grand Theft Auto games.[25] Capcom published the game in Japan on 25 September 2003.[26]

Design
Grand Theft Auto III is the first 3D game in the series,[27] using Criterion Games's RenderWare game engine.[28] Executive producer Sam Houser had always wanted the series to move to 3D,[17] and DMA Design had experimented with 3D worlds in games like Body Harvest and Space Station Silicon Valley.[29] With the release of the PlayStation 2, the team felt a large 3D world was possible.[29] Art director Aaron Garbut felt other video games at the time "were a thing you played", wanting Grand Theft Auto III to be "a place you lived in".[30] An online multiplayer mode was planned, but dropped due to time and resource limitations.[31]


Grand Theft Auto III is the first game in the series to use a third-person perspective view, positioning the camera closer to the player character.
When designing the game, the development team expanded upon concepts introduced in the previous Grand Theft Auto games. Benzies said the intention was to recreate the "freedom and diversity" of the previous games in a "living, breathing 3D world", using the power of the PlayStation 2 to do so.[6] The console's ability to use DVDs, an improvement over the PlayStation's limit to CDs, allowed the team to store more data, such as animations, music and environments.[32] Despite this, the team found it difficult to fit the game into the PlayStation 2's 32 megabytes of RAM, due to the scale. The game's size also created difficulties for the testers, due to the variety of options.[5] Benzies felt creating a living city was the "underlying principle" of the game's concept during development.[6] Sam Houser felt the game's 3D element allowed the "chemistry of the team [to come] together perfectly for the first time".[33]

A major difficulty the team encountered was converting all game elements into a fully 3D world, including the sound and radio stations, as well as designing and voicing the non-player characters, due to the amount that existed within the open world.[34] Producer Dan Houser said there were about 8,000 lines of recorded dialogue in the game,[34] while audio programmer Raymond Usher estimated about 18,000.[35] The basic technical elements of the game began to work together in mid-2000, with a carjacking mechanic prototype and stable streaming model.[36] Streaming was initially intended to be reserved for music and map geometry, but other elements were eventually included when it became apparent to the team as more data was entered.[5]

When designing the game world, the team initially created a "hybrid city", which Dan Houser described as "a post industrial Midwest slash east coast generic" city.[37] Upon developing within this game world, the team realised basing the design on a real location meant "you have a lot of things you can say about it".[37] As a result, they redesigned Liberty City, which had been previously featured in the first Grand Theft Auto (1997), basing it loosely on New York City.[37] DMA Design worked with a team at Rockstar in New York for cultural references; the Rockstar team would regularly work long hours for full weeks, ensuring the references, such as in-game car manufacturers, were appropriate to the city.[29]

The city is broken into three islands: an industrial section representing Brooklyn and Queens, a commercial centre resembling Manhattan, and suburbs similar to New Jersey.[38] The islands unlock as the story progresses; the team wanted players to "start out feeling poor and work to being richer".[39] Dan Houser described Liberty City as a "hybrid of a generic American city", including Chicago, Pittsburgh, Detroit, New York, and Philadelphia.[39] He felt the parallel realism of the world allowed the team to make more social commentary.[31] Sam Houser cited films and shows like Heat (1995) and The Sopranos (1999–2007) as inspiration for the setting and wanted to emulate them in the game.[40] He also cited the influence of The Legend of Zelda, Super Mario 64 and the 1990 film Goodfellas, describing Grand Theft Auto III as "a cross between a gangster movie and an RPG".[41][42]

Story and characters
The team developed the story and design simultaneously. Dan Houser said, "we use the story to expose the mechanics, and we use the mechanics to tell the story";[19] however, he found it difficult to create the narrative, as the game is so strongly focused on player freedom. He wanted the story to be more nuanced and interesting than the generic "rise and fall and rise again of a superhero bad guy".[39] The game's script was also focused on mission objectives, attempting to implement high amounts of interactivity.[36] Dan Houser felt each mission is "its own short story", and part of an "overarching story".[19] He and co-writer James Worrall drew influence from films like The Warriors, Taxi Driver, Scarface, and Payback,[43] and the depiction of mafiosi featured in Martin Scorsese's films;[36] When writing the story, Dan Houser and Worrall regularly met with the designers, and filled a room with post-it notes to reconstruct the story components to shape the game.[36]

Many of the game characters were animated using motion capture, filmed at a rented studio at the Brooklyn Navy Yard,[40] though this was limited by technical constraints. The character movement was also treated as being cinematic, though limited polygons heavily inhibited this.[44] Animating non-player characters entering and driving cars proved to be difficult for the team, due to the variety of vehicle designs. "It involved chaining together dozens of different animations and altering key frames in code", recalled software engineer Alan Campbell.[31] The team used varying camera angles when animating the game's cutscenes to evoke different emotions.[45] For the voice acting, the team wanted "natural, subtle performances", which proved difficult as many of the actors "had in their head the idea that because video games are animated, their performances needed to be animated", explained motion capture director Navid Khonsari.[44]

Claude is unnamed in the game,[46] and his name is not officially revealed until his appearance in Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas (2004). He is a silent protagonist, never speaking throughout his appearances; the team decided upon this primarily because it "did not seem like a major issue", due to the other challenges faced during development, and also partly to allow players to identify with the character, as he would be who the players want him to be.[13] The developers did not have "any one single inspiration" for Claude; they liked the idea of a "strong, silent killer, who would be juxtaposed with all of these neurotic and verbose mobsters".[13]

Sound and radio design
Grand Theft Auto III features about three and a half hours of in-game radio material. For the music, the team sought a broad diversity to recreate the real sensation of skipping through radio stations, reflecting the gangster movie culture invoked by the game. The team used the talk radio stations to add character to the city and provide a "unique take on American life";[47] Sam Houser described it as "a very iconoclastic look at America".[41] The team used real DJs to portray those on the radio. In doing so, they wrote unusual dialogue for the DJs, seeking the effect of "high production values and absurd content". Music director Craig Conner assembled the assets of the radio station—music, s, DJ dialogue, and station imaging.[47]

Chatterbox FM, one of the game's radio stations, is entirely talk radio hosted by Lazlow Jones, who met Rockstar's managing director Terry Donovan in 2001 as they were both preparing to travel to Los Angeles for E3. Donovan invited Jones to Rockstar's offices in Manhattan, where he met the development team, including Dan and Sam Houser and producer Jamie King, and they invited him to work on the game. The writing sessions took place at Dan Houser's apartment, and the entire process, including editing and recording, took around four to five months. With the station's guests and callers, the writers wanted to satirise American lifestyles, focusing on fictional stories as opposed to quickly outdated stories based on recent news. Jones found the conversations to be natural, having worked in radio for several years. The roles of the guests and callers were performed by Jones's friends and neighbours, including his father, and were recorded in New York.[48]

Cuts and changes

After the events of 9/11, the original colour scheme of the police cars in the game (top), which resembled that of the NYPD, was changed to a generic, black-and-white design common in the United States.

The game's original cover art was changed after 9/11,[49] but still used for its European release.[50]
[We] felt that a full content review of all our titles and the marketing materials we use to represent them was absolutely necessary for us ... we have come across certain small contextual references that we were no longer comfortable with, as well as a couple of very rare gameplay instances that no longer felt appropriate to us.

— Terry Donovan, Rockstar managing director, IGN, 19 September 2001[51]
Prior to Grand Theft Auto III's initial release, several modifications were made to the game. While changes are frequent during game development, these changes were noted to be around the time of the 11 September attacks, which led to speculation that the changes were motivated by the attacks. On 19 September 2001, Rockstar delayed the game's release by three weeks, citing the attacks as an influencing factor in the delay.[51] "Everyone had someone who had an uncle or brother [who was impacted by the attack]", said Paul Eibeler, then president of Take-Two Interactive.[52]

One of the changes made shortly after the 9/11 attacks was the colour scheme of the police cars. Originally blue with white stripes, resembling the New York City Police Department, it was changed to a black-and-white design common among several police departments in the United States, such as Los Angeles and San Francisco. Other changes included altering the flight path of a plane to avoid appearing to fly into or behind a skyscraper and removing a mission referencing terrorists, as well as some changes to pedestrian dialogue and talk radio.[53] Another cut to the game was the character of Darkel, a revolutionary urchin who vowed to bring down the city's economy. When references to Darkel were found in the game's code, speculation arose that he was related to 9/11, but Dan Houser explained the character had been cut "months before [release]".[53] There were reports and previews stating the game featured schoolchildren as pedestrians prior to release,[54] although Rockstar dismissed such rumours as "nonsense".[49]

Rockstar stated the game was "about 1% different" after 9/11, and the biggest change was the cover art. They felt the game's original cover, which was still used for its release in Europe, was "too raw" after 9/11, and it was changed to what became the "signature style" of the series.[49] Sam Houser said the cover was designed in an evening and was instantly preferred over the original cover.[50] The cover was inspired by the movie posters for 1960s films, such as The Thomas Crown Affair (1968).[49]

Reception
Critical response
PlayStation 2 version reception
Aggregate score
Aggregator	Score
Metacritic	97/100[55]
Review scores
Publication	Score
1Up.com	A+
AllGame	5/5
Edge	8/10
Eurogamer	10/10
Game Informer	9.5/10
GamePro	5/5[59]
GameRevolution	A
GameSpot	9.6/10
GameSpy	94/100
IGN	9.6/10[4]
Grand Theft Auto III was released to critical acclaim. Metacritic calculated an average score of 97 out of 100, indicating "universal acclaim", based on 56 reviews. It is tied with Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 as the highest-rated PlayStation 2 game on the site and tied with a number of others as the sixth-highest-rated game overall.[63] Reviewers liked the game's sound,[4][58][61] gameplay,[56][58][64] and open world design,[4][10][60] though some criticism was directed at the controls.[11][59][62] Tom Bramwell of Eurogamer called Grand Theft Auto III "a luscious, sprawling epic",[58] and Official PlayStation Magazine named it "the most innovative, outlandish, brilliant video game".[65] GameSpot's Jeff Gerstmann described the game as "an incredible experience that shouldn't be missed by anyone";[61] IGN's Doug Perry named it "one of the best titles of the year, on PlayStation 2, or on any system".[4]

Many reviewers found the 3D graphics a welcome change from the 2D of the previous games.[4][64] GameSpot's Gerstmann particularly praised the character and vehicle models, and the overall texture quality of the city.[61] GameSpy's Andrei Alupului found the graphics "really rather impressive", describing the car models as "greatly improved" over those in Midnight Club.[62] Eurogamer's Bramwell considered the graphics "generally pleasant to look at", but considered it inferior to games like Gran Turismo 3 and Ico.[58] Justin Leeper of Game Informer described game world as "stunning in scope and detail",[60] and Perry of IGN found it to be "on a scale that's truly epic".[4] Game Revolution's Ben Silverman called the city a "technological marvel ... that captures the essence of gritty city life in amazing detail".[10]

IGN's Perry considered the game's sound "unbelievably and meticulously delivered", particularly praising the soundtrack, voice acting and sound design, stating it was "really approached as if it were done for a movie".[4] Eurogamer's Bramwell echoed similar remarks, describing the city sounds as "perfect" and the soundtrack as "monstrous".[58] The sound was described as "terrific" by GameSpot's Gerstmann and Game Revolution's Silverman,[10][61] and 1UP.com appreciated the subtlety of the in-game radio stations.[56] AllGame's Scott Alan Marriott named the music "the true star" of the game.[11]

Reviewers considered the style of the game's missions to be a welcoming departure from those in previous games.[58][61] 1UP.com described the missions as "wonderfully creative",[56] while GamesMaster appreciated the diversity.[64] IGN's Perry similarly appreciated the variety and scale of the missions, and praised the amount of available side missions.[4] GameSpy's Alupului described the game's story as "well-paced" and "coherent", featuring plot elements akin to a mob film.[62] GameSpot's Gerstmann found the missions entertaining and challenging, but noted exploring the game world also offers "a great deal of fun" to players.[61]

Reactions to the game's controls were mixed. Alupului of GameSpy found the game "controls beautifully", both while driving and on-foot.[62] Game Revolution's Silverman identified the control issues as the game's only flaw, although praised the responsiveness of the driving mechanics.[10] Matt Helgeson of Game Informer similarly described the driving as "great", but noted "clunky" combat.[60] GamePro's Four-Eyed Dragon found the cars simple to manoeuvre.[59] Edge described the game's combat as "an awkward system that stymies play".[57] 1UP.com noted particular flaws in the targeting system, explaining it "often focuses on the wrong guy".[56]

Windows version
Windows version reception
Aggregate score
Aggregator	Score
Metacritic	93/100[66]
Review scores
Publication	Score
Game Informer	9.5/10[67]
GameSpot	9.3/10[68]
GameSpy	94/100[69]
IGN	9.4/10[70]
PC Gamer (US)	92%[71]
X-Play	4/5[72]
When Grand Theft Auto III was released for Windows in May 2002, it received similar acclaim. Metacritic calculated an average score of 93 out of 100, indicating "universal acclaim", based on 20 reviews;[66] it is the highest-rated 2002 Windows game on Metacritic.[73] Reviewers liked the visual enhancements[68][69][70] and control improvements,[67][71][72] but criticised the port for its demanding system requirements.[68][70][72]

The in-game features and controls in the port were generally well received. IGN's Tal Blevins praised the higher precision of the mouse controls, finding the aiming mechanic more precise.[70] GameSpot's Erik Wolpaw also commended the mouse controls, but disapproved the replay system, particularly due to the lack of options with timing and camera controls.[68] Extended Play's Andrew Bub appreciated the addition of a custom radio station, as well as the availability of custom skins.[72] Daniel Morris of PC Gamer praised the gameplay tweaks provided by the port but criticised the lack of major additional features, such as an overhead map of the in-game city.[71]

The port's visuals received a positive response from reviewers. GameSpot's Wolpaw praised the port's reworked textures but criticised the frequent popup and the advanced system requirements.[68] IGN's Blevins similarly criticised the necessity of an advanced system for stable play, but ultimately felt the port looks "a bit nicer" than the original game.[70] GameSpy's Sal Accardo felt the port "looks much sharper" than the PlayStation 2 version, though noted some "choppy" animations.[69] Extended Play's Bub mentioned the advanced settings resulted in slowdown and crashes.[72] Game Informer's Matt Helgeson noticed little difference between the visuals of the original and the port.[67]

Mobile version
Mobile version reception
Aggregate score
Aggregator	Score
Metacritic	80/100[74]
Review scores
Publication	Score
Destructoid	7/10[3]
Eurogamer	5/10[75]
GameSpot	7/10[76]
IGN	7.5/10[77]
Pocket Gamer	9/10[78]
When Grand Theft Auto III was released to mobile devices in December 2011, it received generally positive reviews. Metacritic calculated an average score of 80 out of 100, based on 26 reviews.[74] Reviewers liked the enhanced visuals,[3][77] but criticism was directed at the touchscreen controls.[75][76]

IGN's Peter Eykemans commended the port's smoother textures, especially condensed on a mobile screen,[77] while Destructoid's James Stephanie Sterling noted improvements in the character and vehicle models.[3] Mark Walton of GameSpot wrote the game runs well on high-end devices like the Motorola Xoom and Samsung Galaxy S II, but noticed significant frame rate and texture issues on the Xperia Play.[76] Pocket Gamer's Mark Brown identified the game's short draw distance leading to sudden popup, although still found the models and textures "have been given a tune-up" in the port.[78]

The touchscreen controls received a mixed response. Eurogamer's Dan Whitehead appreciated the driving mechanics, but felt moving on-foot is "a flaky way of navigating" the world, and criticised the "clumsy" shooting mechanics as most of the guns cannot be manually targeted.[75] IGN's Eykemans felt the controls "make half the experience frustrating",[77] and Destructoid's Sterling described them as "by far the biggest barrier toward enjoying" the port.[3] Brown of Pocket Gamer found the touchscreen "hasn't hindered [the game] too drastically", commending simple movement and "effortless" driving mechanics.[78] Some critics identified better controls upon the use of external gamepads, but felt they hinder the game's portability.[76][79]

Accolades
Grand Theft Auto III received multiple nominations and awards from gaming publications. It was awarded Game of the Year at the 2nd Game Developers Choice Awards,[80] and from GameSpot[81] and GameSpy.[82] It was named the Best PlayStation 2 Game by Game Revolution,[83] GameSpot,[84] GameSpy,[85] and IGN.[86] It also won Best Action Game from Game Revolution,[83] GameSpot,[87] and IGN;[88] Most Innovative from GameSpot;[89] and Excellence in Game Design at the Game Developers Choice Awards.[80] GameSpy also awarded the game Most Offensive,[90] Best Use of Radio,[91] and tied for Best Artificial Intelligence.[92] It won the Global Award at the 7th CESA Game Awards in 2003[93] and an Award for Excellence at the 8th CESA Game Awards in 2004.[94] At the 5th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards, Grand Theft Auto III won Outstanding Achievement in Game Design and Outstanding Achievement in Game Play Engineering,[95] and was nominated for Console Action/Adventure Game of the Year.[96] The following year at the 6th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards, the Windows version won Computer Action/Adventure Game of the Year[97] and was nominated for Outstanding Innovation in Computer Gaming.[98]

Sales
In the United States, Grand Theft Auto III was the highest-selling game of 2001, selling over two million units by February 2002.[99] The game was also the second-best-selling game of 2002, only behind its sequel, Grand Theft Auto: Vice City.[100] Take-Two stock significantly increased following the game's launch,[101] and the game was included in PlayStation's Greatest Hits selection.[31] Within a year of release, the game had sold six million copies and generated over US$250 million in revenue;[102] by January 2003, it had sold seven million and generated over US$350 million.[103] In the United States, the game had sold 5.35 million units by June 2004,[104] and 6.55 million units by December 2007.[105] The Windows version accounted for 420,000 sales and $16.9 million in earnings by August 2006 in the United States, where it was the 34th-best-selling computer game between January 2000 and August 2006.[106]

In Japan, Grand Theft Auto III sold around 75,000 copies in its first day,[107] 120,000 in its first week,[108] and roughly 300,000 by December 2003.[109] The number rose above 350,000 copies by January 2008.[108] In Europe, over a million copies of the game were reportedly sold by December 2001.[110] The game earned a "Diamond" award in the United Kingdom, indicating over one million sales;[111] it was the first game to receive this award in the region.[31] The game became one of the best-selling PlayStation 2 games with 11.6 million copies sold,[112] and sold 14.5 million units overall by March 2008.[113]

Controversies
Grand Theft Auto III generated several controversies. GameSpy awarded it "Most Offensive Game of the Year"; calling it "absolutely reprehensible", they wrote the game rewards players for "causing mayhem" and "killing innocent people by the dozen", questioning its appropriateness.[90] The notoriety led American retailer Wal-Mart to check identification of purchasers who appeared under the age of 17 when purchasing mature games.[114] In an essay, assistant professor Shira Chess identified the lack of consequence to player violence due to the ability to respawn upon death or incarceration, and found it denies the "reality of mortality and simultaneously [forces] it on players".[115] Benzies claimed the violence was intended as comedic and the game is "not meant to be taken seriously",[6] and Dan Houser said the team was conscious of the offence the game would attract, but "never marketed it in a way that exploited that".[34]

The game allows players to participate in sexual activities with prostitutes and murder them to reclaim the payment, which was met with widespread controversy.[116] The game also received some backlash for its depiction of crime and allowing violence against police officers. Psychologist David Walsh of the National Institute on Media and the Family said the game "glamorizes antisocial and criminal activity",[117] and "the purpose of the game is to perpetrate crime".[118] In response, Kotaku writer Owen Good wrote the game does not reward players for "proficiency at crime, no matter how much it is accused of doing so".[118] Joanna Weiss of The Boston Globe noted the "adrenaline" players feel when committing crimes in the game, excusing its violence due to its mature classification.[119] In January 2002, the National Organization for Women called for Rockstar and Take-Two to withdraw the game from sale as it "encourages violence and the degradation of women".[120] Matt Richtel of The New York Times wrote the activities within the game "crossed the line into bad taste".[121]

Grand Theft Auto III was initially released in Australia with an MA15+ classification, but the Office of Film and Literature Classification (OFLC) later banned it after re-reviewing, citing its sexual content and violence against prostitutes.[122][123] After Take-Two appealed, the OFLC reaffirmed its ban on 11 December 2001, having reanalysed the game alongside a forensic psychologist. Take-Two recalled the game in Australia and Rockstar made appropriate changes; a modified version was released with an MA15+ classification in January 2002, removing instances of sexual acts with prostitutes.[123] The game was re-rated with an R18+ classification in September 2019, citing "sexual activities related to incentives and rewards".[124] In Japan, the game was designated "harmful" for children in Kanagawa Prefecture in June 2005, essentially removing it from open shelves; Capcom criticised the decision and considered legal action but did not pursue further, and the designation ultimately led to a sales increase.[26]

On 25 June 2003, teenage stepbrothers William and Josh Buckner shot at motorists, killing Aaron Hamel and wounding Kimberly Bede. In statements to investigators, the perpetrators claimed their actions were inspired by Grand Theft Auto III. In response, on 20 October 2003, the families of Hamel and Bede filed a US$246 million lawsuit against Rockstar, Take-Two, Sony Computer Entertainment and Wal-Mart.[125] Rockstar and Take-Two filed for dismissal of the lawsuit, stating in United States district court on 29 October 2003 that the "ideas and concepts", and the "purported psychological effects" of the perpetrators, are protected by the First Amendment's free-speech clause.[126] Jack Thompson, the lawyer representing the victims, denied Rockstar's claims and attempted to move the lawsuit into a state court for consideration under Tennessee's consumer protection act.[126]

Legacy
Grand Theft Auto III has been frequently included among the greatest video games of all time.[127] In 2007, GamePro called Grand Theft Auto III the most important video game of all time, explaining the "game's open-ended gameplay elements have revolutionized the way all video games are made".[128] Similarly, IGN ranked the game among the "Top 10 Most Influential Games",[129] and GameSpot listed it among the greatest games of all time.[130] In 2009, Game Informer wrote that Grand Theft Auto III "changed the gaming landscape forever with its immersive open world sandbox",[131] and in 2016, GamesRadar+ named it the "most important game" of the 2000s.[132] Time named it one of the greatest video games of all time in November 2012[133] and August 2016.[134] The game was selected as part of the Game On touring exhibition, demonstrating some of the game's development plans and artwork.[135] In 2016, The Strong National Museum of Play inducted Grand Theft Auto III to its World Video Game Hall of Fame.[136]

Grand Theft Auto III is considered to have a leading role in the popularisation of sandbox games, inspiring those such as Crackdown, Mafia, Saints Row, True Crime, and Watch Dogs.[29][129] The term "Grand Theft Auto clone" is frequently used to describe subsequent video games released with similar open-ended gameplay as Grand Theft Auto III.[137] While previous video games used open world design, including earlier Grand Theft Auto games, Grand Theft Auto III took this gameplay foundation and expanded it into a 3D world,[130] offering an unprecedented variety of minigames and side-missions.[29][129] Journalist and consultant Tom Bramwell felt the game did not invent a lot of its gameplay features, but "brought them all together".[29] Due to its greater success over its predecessors, it is credited with popularising the open-world genre;[1] Dan Houser felt the game made it "one of the most vibrant genres today",[19] and Garbut felt it led to the complexities of Rockstar's future open world games, including the later Grand Theft Auto games and Red Dead Redemption 2 (2018).[17][138] IGN's Jack Harwood thought the game's talk radio station inspired similar inclusions in other open world games, such as Mafia III (2016) and Watch Dogs: Legion (2020).[48]

The game also led the trend of mature video games; Dan Houser felt it allowed other developers to create violent shooters.[139] Hal Halpin, president of the Entertainment Consumers Association, described Grand Theft Auto III as the "lightning rod for the violence-in-games debate".[140] Metro's Roger Hargreaves wrote it "emboldened a whole new wave of games that were ... fixated with violence [and] gang culture".[141] Greg Ford of Electronic Gaming Monthly felt the game allowed the medium to handle mature subject matter in a more serious manner than previously perceived, and noted the improvement of video game classification as a result of its controversy.[140] King said video games at the time were often associated with children or nerds, and the development team "wanted the rest of the entertainment industry to pay attention" and understand the medium could also contain mature, adult content.[29]

Following the success, Rockstar developed further games in the series. Vice City and San Andreas are set in their titular locations in 1986 and 1992, respectively.[142][143] Grand Theft Auto Advance (2004) is set in Liberty City roughly a year before the events of Grand Theft Auto III.[144] Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories (2005) takes place three years before the events of Grand Theft Auto III in the same rendition of Liberty City.[145] A completely redesigned version of the city was later used in Grand Theft Auto IV (2008),[146] The Lost and Damned (2009),[147] The Ballad of Gay Tony (2009),[148] and Chinatown Wars (2009).[149]

Ports
Grand Theft Auto III was released on 21 May 2002 for Windows, supporting higher screen resolutions and draw distance, and featuring more detailed textures.[150] Analysts believed the game would eventually release on GameCube,[151] though it never materialised.[152] Grand Theft Auto III was bundled with Vice City in the compilation Grand Theft Auto: Double Pack, released on the Xbox on 4 November 2003 in North America[153] and 2 January 2004 in Europe.[154] The Xbox version featured a custom soundtrack support as well as improved audio, polygon models, and reflections over the previous ports.[155] Double Pack was later bundled with San Andreas as part of Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy, released in October 2005.[145] The Trilogy was also released for OS X on 12 November 2010.[156] On 15 December 2011, for the game's tenth anniversary, War Drum Studios ported the game to iOS and Android; this port is almost identical to the Windows version, with the addition of enhanced models and textures and touchscreen controls.[157][158] This port was also released on Fire OS on 15 May 2014.[159] A PlayStation 3 version was released on 25 September 2012 via the PlayStation Network.[160] The original PlayStation 2 version was released for the PlayStation 4 as a PS2 Classics game, on 5 December 2015.[161] In 2012, a modding community under the name RAGE Classic Team ported the map over to Grand Theft Auto IV, named Grand Theft Auto III: RAGE Classic.[162]

An enhanced version of The Trilogy, The Definitive Edition, including Grand Theft Auto III, was released for the Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Windows, Xbox One, and Xbox Series X/S on 11 November 2021, to celebrate the game's twentieth anniversary,[163] and for Android and iOS on 14 December 2023.[164] Existing versions of the game were removed from digital retailers in preparation for The Definitive Edition,[163] but later restored as a bundle on the Rockstar Store.[165]

A core team of six fans reverse-engineered the game and released it as an executable in April 2020, having worked on it since 2016. The project, re3, allows the game to be unofficially ported to platforms such as Nintendo Switch, PlayStation Vita, and Wii U.[166][167] Take-Two issued a DMCA takedown for the project in February 2021,[168] though it was restored in June after the team filed a counter-notice.[169] In September 2021, Take-Two filed a lawsuit in California against the programmers, asserting the projects constitute copyright infringement.[170] In July 2024, fan developer SKMP started creating a Dreamcast port, seen as a significant undertaking due to the console's limited memory;[171][172] it was released in December.[173]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Grand Theft Auto IV

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Grand Theft Auto IV
Video game cover art featuring various a collage of characters and scenarios
Developer(s)	Rockstar North[a]
Publisher(s)	Rockstar Games
Producer(s)	Leslie Benzies
Programmer(s)	
Adam Fowler
Alexander Roger
Obbe Vermeij
Artist(s)	Aaron Garbut
Writer(s)	
Dan Houser
Rupert Humphries
Composer(s)	Michael Hunter
Series	Grand Theft Auto
Engine	RAGE
Platform(s)	
PlayStation 3
Xbox 360
Windows
Release	PlayStation 3, Xbox 360
WW: 29 April 2008
Windows
NA: 2 December 2008
PAL: 3 December 2008
Genre(s)	Action-adventure
Mode(s)	Single-player, multiplayer
Grand Theft Auto IV is a 2008 action-adventure game developed by Rockstar North and published by Rockstar Games. It is the sixth main entry in the Grand Theft Auto series, following 2004's Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas, and the eleventh entry overall. Set in the fictional Liberty City, based on New York City, the single-player story follows Eastern European war veteran Niko Bellic and his attempts to escape his past while under pressure from high-profile criminals. The open world design lets players freely roam Liberty City, consisting of three main islands, and the neighbouring state of Alderney, which is based on New Jersey.

The game is played from a third-person perspective and its world is navigated on foot and by vehicle. Throughout the single-player mode, players control Niko Bellic. An online multiplayer mode is also included with the game, allowing up to 32 players to engage in both cooperative and competitive gameplay in a recreation of the single-player setting.[b] Two expansion packs were later released for the game, The Lost and Damned and The Ballad of Gay Tony, which both feature new plots that are interconnected with the main Grand Theft Auto IV storyline, and follow new protagonists.

Development of Grand Theft Auto IV began soon after the release of San Andreas and was shared between many of Rockstar's studios worldwide. The game introduced a shift to a more realistic and detailed style and tone for the series. Unlike previous entries, Grand Theft Auto IV lacked a strong cinematic influence, as the team attempted an original approach to the story. As part of their research for the open world, the development team conducted extensive field research in New York, capturing over 100,000 photographs and several hours of video. The developers considered the world to be the most important element of the game; though not the largest map in the series, they considered it comparable in scope due to its verticality and level of detail. The budget climbed to over US$100 million, making it one of the most expensive video games to develop.

Grand Theft Auto IV was released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles in April 2008, and for Windows in December. It received critical acclaim, with praise directed at the narrative and open-world design. Grand Theft Auto IV broke industry sales records and became the fastest-selling entertainment product in history at the time, earning US$310 million in its first day and US$500 million in its first week. Considered one of the most significant titles of the seventh generation of video games, and by many critics as one of the greatest video games of all time, it won year-end accolades, including Game of the Year awards from several gaming publications. It is among the best-selling video games with over 25 million copies sold by 2013. The game generated controversy, with criticism directed at the game's depiction of violence and players' ability to drink-drive. Its successor, Grand Theft Auto V, was released in 2013.

Gameplay
Grand Theft Auto IV is an action-adventure game played from a third-person perspective.[2] Players complete missions—linear scenarios with set objectives—to progress through the story. It is possible to have several active missions running at one time, as some require players to wait for further instructions or events. Outside of missions, players can freely roam the game's open world and complete optional side missions.[3] Composed of the fictional city of Liberty City, the world is larger in area than most earlier Grand Theft Auto series entries.[4] At the beginning of the game, players can only explore the first island—composed of Dukes and Broker—with all other islands unlocking as the story progresses.[5]

Players use melee attacks, firearms and explosives to fight enemies, and may run, jump, swim or use vehicles to navigate the game's world. There is a first-person perspective option when using vehicles. In combat, auto-aim and a cover system can be used as assistance against enemies. Should players take damage, their health meter can be fully regenerated by consuming food or drinks, using medical kits, or calling for paramedics.[6] If players commit crimes, the game's law enforcement agencies may respond as indicated by a "wanted" meter in the head-up display (HUD). On the meter, the displayed stars indicate the current wanted level (for example, at the maximum six-star level, efforts by law enforcement to incapacitate players become very aggressive). Law enforcement officers will search for players who leave the wanted vicinity. The wanted meter enters a cool-down mode and eventually recedes when players are hidden from the officers' line of sight.[7]

The player character positioned in cover behind a vehicle, preparing to shoot at police officers on the other side of the vehicle.
Combat in Grand Theft Auto IV was reworked to include a cover system.[6]
The game's cover system allows players to move between cover, to fire blindly, aim freely, and target a specific enemy. Individual body parts can also be targeted.[8] Melee attacks include additional moves, such as dodging, blocking, disarming an opponent and counter-attacking. Body armour can be used to absorb gunshots and explosive damage, but is used up in the process. When health is entirely depleted, gameplay stops, and players respawn at the nearest hospital.[6]

The single-player mode lets players control an Eastern European war veteran, Niko Bellic. During the story, Niko meets and befriends various new characters. They can then perform favours for Niko whenever he asks; for example, his cousin Roman, who owns a taxi service, can send one of his cabs to take Niko to any destination around the city. Cabs are always available during gameplay for quick travel to a destination. Throughout the course of the game, players are also faced with morality choices, which alter the storyline appropriately depending on the player's choice. While free roaming the game world, players may engage in context-specific activities such as bowling or darts. Other available activities include a vigilante mini-game, and in-game television programming.[9][10][11] Niko has a cell phone for contacting friends and starting activities.[12] The cell phone is also used to access the game's online multiplayer mode, and to enter cheat codes.[13] To access the in-game Internet, which allows Niko to send and receive emails and set up prospective dates with potential girlfriends, Niko can use Internet cafés located around the city.[14] The game also features a subway system, allowing players to quickly traverse through the game's world.[15]

The online multiplayer mode for Grand Theft Auto IV allows up to 32 players[b] to freely roam across the map. Players decide which game mode they wish to play, including deathmatches and street races. Both cooperative and competitive game modes are available, split into ranked and unranked matches.[16] For players to level up through ranks, in-game money has to be earned. The game also features a Free Mode, in which players have the entire map open to explore, with no end goal or mission to complete. Hosts of the game can control many variables, such as police presence, traffic, and weapons.[17] The multiplayer mode was discontinued on Windows in 2020.[18]

Synopsis
Setting
Grand Theft Auto IV takes place in 2008, within a redesigned version of Liberty City. The design of the city focuses on a recreation of four of the boroughs of New York City: Broker (based on Brooklyn), Dukes (Queens), Bohan (The Bronx), and Algonquin (Manhattan). The setting also includes the neighbouring state of Alderney (based on New Jersey).[19] Initially, bridges are locked down due to a terrorist threat, and police constantly pursue players if the bridges are crossed. The blockades are lifted as the story progresses, allowing the player to traverse between islands safely.

Grand Theft Auto IV is set in the fictional "HD Universe", which mirrors and parodies the real world. The previous games formed fictional universes of their own,[c] which despite having many similarities with the HD Universe, are considered to be different continuities. Hence, the Liberty City depicted in Grand Theft Auto IV is different from its previous renditions, and the game itself serves as a reboot for the series. The new timeline established by Grand Theft Auto IV would continue with two expansion packs, The Lost and Damned and The Ballad of Gay Tony, and a sequel, Grand Theft Auto V, as well as its online component, Grand Theft Auto Online.[21][22][23] The handheld game Grand Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars is also considered part of the HD Universe, because it features the same map as Grand Theft Auto IV, except for Alderney.[24]

Plot
Niko Bellic, an Eastern European ex-soldier,[25] arrives in Liberty City aboard the cargo ship Platypus to escape his criminal past, pursue the American Dream, and search for the man who betrayed his unit to an ambush during a war ten years prior. Reuniting with his cousin Roman, he discovers that his tales of riches were lies concealing his small, dirty apartment, unprofitable taxi company, gambling debts, and disputes with loan sharks. Niko begins assisting Roman with his problems, which leads him to make his first criminal contacts in the city. He befriends Yardies second-in-command Little Jacob and is forced to work for Vlad Glebov, Roman's Russian loan shark, whom Niko eventually kills upon learning he had slept with Roman's girlfriend, Mallorie.

In retaliation, Niko and Roman are kidnapped by Russian mobsters on orders of their boss Mikhail Faustin and his lieutenant, Dimitri Rascalov. Indifferent to Vlad's murder, Faustin releases them and employs Niko as a hitman, ordering him to kill the son of Russian crime lord Kenny Petrović. When Petrović threatens retaliation, Dimitri convinces Niko to assassinate Faustin and satisfy Petrović. However, Dimitri betrays him after the killing and brings Niko to his former employer, Ray Bulgarin, who accuses Niko of stealing from him during a failed human trafficking job years earlier. Niko denies the allegation and a firefight ensues, allowing Dimitri and Bulgarin to escape.

Dimitri's men burn down Niko and Roman's apartment and taxi company, forcing them to flee to Bohan. While Niko finds work with several local drug lords, Dimitri briefly kidnaps Roman in a failed attempt to lure Niko into a trap. Later, Niko discovers that his romantic interest, a woman named Michelle, is an undercover government agent, who then entraps him into working for her superior. In exchange for the murders of several known or suspected terrorists, the superior clears Niko's criminal record and aids him with seeking the traitor. Roman's fortunes improve when he receives a large amount of insurance money from the arson, which he uses to rebuild the business and buy an apartment in Algonquin. Roman also proposes to Mallorie, who accepts.

While working for the Irish Mob, Niko befriends gangster Patrick "Packie" McReary, helping him and his brothers carry out various jobs, including a major bank robbery. Niko is later hired by Ray Boccino, a caporegime in the Pegorino crime family, to oversee a diamond deal, which goes awry. Boccino repays Niko by helping him find his ex-comrade Florian Cravic, now known as Bernie Crane, who claims he was not the one to betray their unit. Niko realises that the traitor was the only other survivor: Darko Brevic. Niko continues working for the Mafia and earns the trust of Don Jimmy Pegorino, who orders him to kill Boccino after suspecting him of being a police informant. Niko also helps Packie kidnap Don Giovanni Ancelotti's daughter to ransom her for the diamonds, but Bulgarin intercepts the exchange. In the ensuing firefight, the diamonds are lost.

Eventually, government agents find Darko in Romania and bring him to Liberty City for Niko to decide his fate. Afterwards, Niko is summoned by Pegorino for a final favour: to help with a highly lucrative heroin deal in collusion with Dimitri. He must decide to either work with Dimitri or exact revenge.[26] If Niko goes through with the deal, Dimitri betrays him again,[27] kills Pegorino,[28] and sends an assassin to kill Niko at Roman's wedding, but the assassin accidentally kills Roman instead;[29] Niko retaliates by tracking and murdering Dimitri.[28] If Niko chooses revenge, he kills Dimitri aboard the Platypus,[30] prompting Pegorino to target Niko at Roman's wedding but accidentally kill Packie's sister Kate, whom Niko had been dating;[29] Niko retaliates by tracking and murdering Pegorino.[31] Later, Niko learns that Mallorie is pregnant.

Development

Rockstar North's former studio in Edinburgh, Scotland, where Grand Theft Auto IV's development was overseen
Preliminary work on Grand Theft Auto IV began in November 2004,[32] a month after the release of Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas.[33] Rockstar president Sam Houser felt that following up San Andreas was "a nightmare".[34] Rockstar North, the core 220-person team behind the game, co-opted studios owned by parent company Rockstar Games to facilitate development between a full team of over 1,000,[35] including 50 employees at Rockstar NYC, 40 at Rockstar Lincoln, 10 at Rockstar San Diego, and around 600–700 working part-time internally and externally.[36] Some key members of the development team worked 12-hour days during production, often without holidays.[35] The team decided to continue the numbering scheme absent from the previous two main games to represent the same leap in production as Grand Theft Auto 2 (1999) to Grand Theft Auto III (2001).[33] Development of Grand Theft Auto IV ceased by 21 April 2008 when the game was submitted for manufacturing.[37] Producer Leslie Benzies estimated that the budget of the development efforts exceeded US$100 million, making Grand Theft Auto IV one of the most expensive video games ever made.[35]

Research and open world design
The game's setting, Liberty City, is based on New York City. The team did not look at the previous renditions of Liberty City as inspiration, wanting it to retain the "general feel" but nothing else.[38] The map is roughly three times the size of Grand Theft Auto III's.[38] The developers originally considered using the entire state of New York, before restricting it to Manhattan, and then expanding it out again. They considered including more suburbs with woods, and would regularly vote on which areas to include.[39] Art director Aaron Garbut said that the team chose the setting because of the detail and variety it provided, describing New York as "an amazing, diverse, vibrant, cinematic city".[40] Writer Dan Houser added that the team "wanted to be somewhere where we had a foothold" due to the amount of research required for the world; Rockstar Games's main headquarters are located in New York.[41] The team consciously avoided a precise recreation of New York City to allow for more enjoyable game design,[32] selecting the areas that they felt "characterised it the best".[40] Garbut wanted to capture a caricature of the city as he felt that most people were familiar with "the highlights" from film or literature but did not need to know the areas precisely.[40] The city was not built with specific missions in mind; the area was created first, and missions implemented later.[42]

To achieve a realistic environment, 60–70 employees from Rockstar North travelled to New York for research: first at the beginning of the project in March or April 2005 for a week and a half,[39] and a smaller trip in 2007.[38] Police officers who previously worked the beat drove the team around Washington Heights.[39] A full-time research team based in New York handled further requests for information, such as the ethnic minority of a neighbourhood or videos of traffic patterns. Videos shot in New York were played on televisions at the Rockstar North offices "so while they worked they could look up and there was New York".[39] Benzies claimed that the team took over 100,000 photographs on location in New York,[35] though Garbut estimates that they took around 250,000.[38] They also studied architectural plans for apartments, used satellite images to determine city block layout, researched sales figures for models of cars, and read books that detailed the city's infrastructure, including its subways, sewers, and garbage disposal.[43] Hove Beach is based on Brighton Beach, which Sam Houser found "pretty incredible" and unusual; the name is based on the English city Brighton and Hove, made up of the former neighbouring towns Brighton and Hove.[44] Houser appreciated that Brighton Beach was home to several Eastern Europeans due to the nature of the game's characters.[44]

Dan Houser described Liberty City as "the biggest character" of the game.[40] The Grand Theft Auto IV rendition of Liberty City is more detailed and larger in size than most earlier entries in the series; although smaller than San Andreas, the setting of the previous main game, the developers considered it comparable in scope due to city's verticality, number of buildings, and level of detail.[45] The team wanted less dead spots and irrelevant spaces, such as the wide open deserts in San Andreas.[32] They wanted the game to be "a more focused experience" than San Andreas, and Dan Houser felt that the limited activities of New York allowed this.[33] The team felt that the addition of Niko's mobile phone added to the immersion of the world and represented society's shifted focus on phones.[33] The in-game brands and products are designed over several years; the billboards were implemented in the game around six months prior to release.[38]

Story and character development
See also: Niko Bellic
A middle-aged man looking towards the camera.
Leslie Benzies
A bald middle-aged man smiling at the camera.
Dan Houser
A middle-aged man with brown hair and a bushy brown beard smiling at the camera.
Sam Houser
Benzies produced the game. Dan Houser co-wrote the story,[35] while his brother Sam executive-produced the game.[34]
The game's script, written by Dan Houser and Rupert Humphries, is about 1,000 pages.[35] Approximately 660 actors provided voices for the game over 80,000 lines of dialogue.[39] After conceiving the character and setting, Dan Houser spoke with his brother Sam Houser and Leslie Benzies to bounce story ideas before writing a rough synopsis, a six-paged, detailed document. Once the synopsis was reworked, the designers broke it into missions, represented by a large flow document demonstrating each section. The writers then work on the introductions to the missions; the gameplay dialogue comes much later.[41] Unlike previous Grand Theft Auto games, Grand Theft Auto IV does not have cinematic influences. "We were consciously trying to go, well, if video games are going to develop into the next stage, then the thing isn't to try and do a loving tribute or reference other stuff," said Dan Houser.[41] He said that the writers wanted something "fresh and new and not something that was obviously derived from [a] movie".[41] Dan Houser felt that the quality of the writing had to improve alongside the advancements in graphics and technology. He noted that the improvements in facial animation allowed for slower-paced cutscenes.[40] The unique dialogue that plays when a mission is retried was to ensure that the gameplay felt "less canned and less like Groundhog Day".[40]

Dan Houser described Niko Bellic as "a more rounded character" than those in previous games.[40] He felt that his dual personality—often saving innocent people, while also being a "cold-hearted killer"—made him more relatable.[40] He also felt that Niko's unfamiliarity with Liberty City allowed for the player to relate to him more, only driven by his vague past and relationship with Roman. When deciding on Niko's background, the writers felt that being an immigrant could lead to more dangerous situations, and therefore more enjoyable missions; after discussions with criminal experts, Dan Houser found that "the real scary characters are not born in America anymore".[40] He felt that Niko's outsider view of American culture was "fun".[40] The team wanted Niko to be "more of an anti hero than a hero, capable of making positive actions within his criminal world".[46] They wanted his demeanour to reflect the weight of his past and choices.[46]

Niko's design underwent a few changes, but was finalised early in development.[47] His outfit underwent several changes based on Eastern Europeans, particularly photographs of men fighting in winter wars in Yugoslavia and Chechnya. The primary motivation for the design was a face to convey the appropriate emotions and a body that could move nicely with the new animations.[40] The in-game purchasable outfits were also designed to fit with the character.[33] The team ensured that the gameplay choices presented to the player were not too extensive, as they still had to make sense to the character, who is driven by the people around him. Dan Houser felt that the missions in San Andreas had become too linear, and wanted to present choices to the player in Grand Theft Auto IV.[40]

The writers found that Niko needed a motivation to come to America, so they created his cousin, Roman. Dan Houser felt that the two could not be brothers as there would be a deeper level of familiarity than necessary. He described the two as a double act, with Roman's fantasist charm playing off Niko's tough cynicism. The team gave other non-playable characters (NPCs) more definable behaviours and dialogue to make them feel more alive. The writers initially considered having a smaller group of characters, but found that the story became boring and that players were less likely to explore the world. The stranger characters found in the game world were based on the "crazy people" that populate New York, according to Dan Houser, which in previous games were only able to be captured through radio stations or mild pedestrian behaviours.[38] The team based the ethnicities, clothing, and behaviours of the NPCs on the photographs and videos that they captured around New York, divided into different areas;[40] they created mood boards for each location.[38] The NPCs also converse in different languages.[39]

Art design
Grand Theft Auto IV sees a shift in the series to a more realistic and detailed style and tone, partly a result of the transition to consoles which offered high-definition graphics and the new and improved capabilities of such consoles. The development team worked to represent the upgrade in quality across all design aspects while maintaining the coherence of the previous games.[32] The team took the game's development as an opportunity to "strip things back and start again", refining the art style without losing the style of the series;[40] they distanced the game from the "cartoon-like style" of its predecessors while creating a new style that was consistent across all aspects of the game.[48] Garbut found the increased demand of detail brought on by the advanced technology daunting.[49] A technique used to make the visuals look real was to avoid harsh edges, instead blending surfaces together to make the world look dirty and lived-in.[50] The props department created multiple variations of different objects to make the world more interesting and unique.[40] Grand Theft Auto IV was the first contemporary game in the series since 2001's Grand Theft Auto III; the team felt that enough time had passed to avoid feeling repetitive.[33] The types of in-game vehicles were decided upon early in development, after which the vehicles department begin creating the designs. The vehicles are not based on specific real-life counterparts, but take elements from several, with some original ideas by the developers.[51]

Technical and gameplay design

The process that Grand Theft Auto IV's animation underwent: (top) actors performing on stage, raw motion capture data, (bottom) in-game characters, and the final scene in the game[52]
The proprietary Rockstar Advanced Game Engine was used for Grand Theft Auto IV.[53] Garbut found the game's technical design similar to Grand Theft Auto III's, with both being the first in the series released on their respective platforms. He claimed an operable game engine was not finalised until late in development, at which point "there's still plenty of guesswork" until optimisation near release.[42] The characters' physical performances were recorded using motion capture. Up to eight actors, dressed in full suits, could perform on the motion capture stage at one time.[52] The camera included a teleprompter for actors to read their scripts.[54] Over a hundred moves would be captured each day of production.[52] The voice acting performances were often recorded months later alongside facial reference capture,[55] and an actor's voice could be composited over a different actor's physical performance.[56] The in-game animations were crafted similarly, using a combination of different motion capture performances.[57]

For the gameplay and animations, the team redid a lot of the work from previous games, wanting Grand Theft Auto IV to "feel next-generation".[40] The role-playing elements from San Andreas were removed fairly early in development, partly due to the animation work it would have required, and because consistently needing to visit the gym felt antithetical to Niko's motivations.[33] The game's targeting system was one of the first focuses of development due to the advanced technology; the team wanted it to feel realistic without being too technical. The cover system was a "natural addition" to the targeting.[33] Benzies described the multiplayer as the hardest part of the game's development.[36] The team wanted the multiplayer to feel like an extension of the cinematic single-player experience. Dan Houser described it as "a section of a film rather than the whole narrative".[33] The developers considered adding co-operative multiplayer to the main story campaign, but decided it worked better as a single-player experience.[33]

When Sam Houser first showed interest in using the Euphoria software in the game, he was told that it would be impossible or only limited to cutscenes, but some members of the team were able to make it work. Engineers from NaturalMotion worked on-site at Rockstar North for several months at a time to incorporate Euphoria software into the game.[34] Rockstar also worked with Image Metrics for the game's facial animations. The facial rigs had around 100 joints, with a total of 300 minutes of facial animation. The scale of the project caused some issues for the animators, forcing them to have rigs completed before animation began. They also faced difficulty in the direction of the actor's head—either straight on when looking at the teleprompter, or down when looking at a script. Image Metrics head of production David Barton noted that "having realistic eyes is 90 percent of the battle", as it allows the player to believe the character.[54] SpeedTree was used for in-game environment rendering.[58]

Music production
When selecting music for the in-game radio stations, music supervisor Ivan Pavlovich said "[we had] to pick the songs that make New York today what it is, but make sure they won't feel dated by the time the game comes out."[59] The developers contacted over 2,000 people to obtain recording and publishing rights;[60] they hired a private investigator to locate the relatives of late Skatt Bros. member Sean Delaney to license the band's song, "Walk the Night".[61] Billboard reported that Rockstar paid as much as $5,000 per composition and another $5,000 per master recording per track.[62] Developers originally considered letting players purchase music in an in-game record shop and for Niko to have an MP3 player, but both ideas were cut.[60] DJ Green Lantern produced tracks exclusively for the game's hip-hop radio station The Beat 102.7.[62] Record producer Bobby Konders, who owns the record label Massive B and hosts the in-game radio station Massive B Soundsystem 96.9, flew to Jamaica to get dancehall artists to re-record tracks to make references to the boroughs of Liberty City.[62] The Housers's father, jazz musician Walter Houser, provided several classical music tracks for the game.[34]

Release

Midnight launch of Grand Theft Auto IV at GameStop in Las Vegas
Microsoft's Peter Moore announced Grand Theft Auto IV at E3 2006 by rolling up his sleeve to reveal a temporary tattoo of its logo.[63] The game became widely anticipated.[64] Wedbush Morgan analyst Michael Pachter suggested Take-Two may delay the game from its 16 October 2007 release date to boost 2008 financial results and avoid competing with games like Halo 3;[65] Rockstar responded it was still on track for "late October".[66] In August 2007, Take-Two announced the game would miss its date, delayed to their second fiscal quarter (February–April) of 2008,[67] citing technical difficulties with the PlayStation 3 version.[68] IGN predicted the delay would benefit other publishers, particularly Activision with Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare.[69] On 24 January 2008, Rockstar announced the 29 April release date.[70] Some gameplay features were censored for the Australian and New Zealand versions but the restrictions were subsequently removed.[71][72] Capcom published the game in Japan on 30 October 2008.[73]

In August 2008, Rockstar announced that the game would be coming to Windows on 18 November 2008 in North America and 21 November in Europe,[74] with additional development work by Rockstar Toronto.[75] Microsoft partnered with Rockstar in a US$50 million deal to bring two episodic downloadable content packs to the Xbox 360:[76] Grand Theft Auto IV: The Lost and Damned on 17 February 2009,[77] and Grand Theft Auto: The Ballad of Gay Tony on 29 October 2009.[78] Dan Houser wanted the episodes to show "a different side of Liberty City".[79] In January 2010, Rockstar announced that the DLC would be bundled as Episodes from Liberty City, released for PlayStation 3 and Windows on 13 April 2010 in North America and 16 April in Europe.[80] Episodes from Liberty City was also bundled with the main game in The Complete Edition, released on 26 October 2010 in North America and 29 October in Europe.[81] The Xbox 360 version of the game and its DLC were made backwards compatible with the Xbox One on 9 February 2017.[82]

Promotion

The game was promoted through posters and murals on billboards and buildings, including Chinatown, New York City.
Industry analysts found Grand Theft Auto IV's marketing much more subtle than Microsoft's marketing of Halo 3 (2007), identifying Rockstar's interest in controlling the output at all times.[83] The game was marketed through video trailers and press demonstrations. On 29 March 2007, the debut trailer was released. It was narrated by protagonist Niko, and depicts the open world accompanied by the song "Pruit-Igoe" by Philip Glass, originally composed for Godfrey Reggio's 1982 documentary film Koyaanisqatsi.[84][85] The trailer is credited for starting the Rickrolling meme; after the higher viewership crashed Rockstar's website, several users re-posted the trailer, but some misleadingly played the music video for Rick Astley's "Never Gonna Give You Up".[86][87] The second trailer was released on 28 June 2007, showcasing the game's physics engine and featuring the song "Arm in Arm (Shy Child Remix)" by the Boggs.[88] Dan Houser noted that the game was "still rough" when the first trailer was released, but that cutscenes were "coming on board" by the second trailer's release.[40]

To unveil the game's cover art, Rockstar contracted artists to paint a mural on a wall at a secluded warehouse location, showcasing the art in a video on 28 November 2007.[89] A third trailer was released on 6 December 2007, introducing some of the game's characters, such as Roman and Michelle. The trailer features the song "King Ring" by Russian rap artist Seryoga, which Rockstar felt captured the "melting pot mentality" of Liberty City.[90] Dan Houser wanted the third trailer to capture the "visceral qualities" of the game, but focus less on the story, as the first two trailers had done.[40] On 8 February 2008, five teaser trailers for the game were released, each showcasing a particular character or service within the game.[91] Similar teaser trailers were later released in pairs on 21 February,[92] 7 March,[93] and 11 April.[94] Another trailer, released on 27 March 2008, showcases some scenes from the game, such as a bank robbery and police chase.[95] A television commercial from GameStop debuted on 1 April, focusing on the activities in Liberty City.[96]

Viral marketing strategies were used to promote the game. Wanted posters were placed around New York City promoting the game's characters and website;[97][98] billboard versions were also posted throughout the city.[99] Murals and posters advertising the game were placed on buildings and public transport.[100][101] The Chicago Transit Authority (CTA) removed s promoting the game from their property in April 2008;[101] Take-Two filed a lawsuit in response, claiming that the CTA had violated a contract.[102] Visitors to the website of WKTT Talk Radio—a fictional radio station within the game—were offered a chance to leave a voice mail message stating their problems. Prior to leaving the message, callers were asked to read the terms and conditions, which revealed that some of the voice mail message would be selected for use in the game.[103]

In the month prior to launch, Rockstar and GameStop held a competition offering up to US$10,000 and a trip to New York City for the game's launch event.[104] Microsoft held a similar sweepstakes competition, offering consoles, games, Microsoft Points, a baseball bat, and an invitation to the launch event as rewards.[105] The official Grand Theft Auto IV website was redesigned on 8 February 2008 to show a preview of activities and locales within the game's world.[106] To encourage pre-order sales, Rockstar collaborated with several retail outlets to provide a special edition version of the game. It includes a metal safe deposit box, an art book, and the soundtrack CD.[107] The publisher also collaborated with Sony to release a 40 GB PlayStation 3 console with a copy of the game.[108] GameStop hosted midnight launch events at over 3,500 of its American stores, with contests and giveaways.[109]

Reception
Critical response
Console versions reception
Aggregate score
Aggregator	Score
Metacritic	98/100[110]
Review scores
Publication	Score
1Up.com	A+[111]
Computer and Video Games	9.5/10[112]
Edge	10/10[113]
Eurogamer	10/10[12]
Game Informer	10/10[114]
GameSpot	10/10[116]
GamesRadar+	5/5[115]
IGN	10/10[117]
Grand Theft Auto IV received "universal acclaim" from critics, according to review aggregator Metacritic.[110] It is the second-highest-rated game on the site,[118] and the highest-rated PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 game.[119][120] Reviewers praised the narrative,[111][114][117][121] open world design[111][112][117] and combat system.[112][12][115][116] Hilary Goldstein of IGN felt that the game "sets a new benchmark for open-world games",[117] and Andrew Reiner of Game Informer wrote that the game "completely changes the landscape of gaming".[114]

Reviewers lauded the open world design, some further complimenting the freedom that it allows the player. Seth Schiesel of The New York Times named the city the "real star" of the game.[15] Official Xbox Magazine's Hicks was impressed by the city, attributing this to the game's artificial intelligence.[121] Robinson of Computer and Video Games considered the environment believable, and felt that the world was "utterly unmatched".[112] Goldstein of IGN felt that, although Liberty City is inspired by New York, it is not beholden to it. He wrote that the city "exists in its own universe and rightfully so".[117] Crispin Boyer of 1UP.com directed praise at the city's "breathtaking vistas, incredibly varied scenery, and lived-in look."[111] Conversely, Jesse Costantino of GameRevolution felt that the game lacked important features common in other open world games.[122]

Reviewers praised the narrative. IGN's Goldstein accepted that the darker tones to the story were a break from series tradition.[117] Jon Hicks of Official Xbox Magazine felt surprised by the amount of depth to the story.[121] Reiner of Game Informer wrote that the level of freedom in the game contributed to his enjoyment of the story.[114] The morality choices faced by players throughout the narrative were also welcomed. 1UP.com's Boyer felt that they gave the game an element of "replayability".[111] Eurogamer's Tom Bramwell considered the morality choices a fair substitute over "bosses with large health bars".[12]

The player character sitting next to the main antagonist, at a bench on the side of the road.
The game's protagonist, Niko Bellic, with the main antagonist, Dimitri Rascalov. Reviewers praised the story and characters, commending the morality choices faced by players.[12][111]
The game's characters—particularly Niko—received positive reactions from critics.[12] Hicks of Official Xbox Magazine and Andy Robinson of Computer and Video Games both called Niko "charismatic" and "likeable", stating that they prefer him over previous protagonists of the series.[112][121] George Walter of GamesRadar praised the depth of the character, and IGN's Goldstein felt that the character of Niko feels relatable when faced with difficult decisions.[115] Jeff Gerstmann of Giant Bomb felt that Niko was "the only thing that mattered to [him]" as he progressed through the story, with the character becoming one of his favourite features of the game.[123] Schiesel of The New York Times named Niko one of the most realised video game characters attributing this to the game's script,[15] while 1UP.com's Boyer commended the use of character bonding during missions.[111]

Many reviewers found the combat system was more responsive than in previous games, particularly praising the addition of the cover system.[111][112][12] Justin Calvert of GameSpot wrote that the cover system makes the game's combat a "huge improvement" over previous games.[116] Reiner of Game Informer agreed, writing that the targeting system makes players feel responsible for all deaths.[114] IGN's Goldstein praised the fluidity of the cover system, and felt that the auto aim mechanic is a "great help in larger battles".[117] GamesRadar's Walter wrote that the cover system has "paved the way to a new style of mission".[115] David McComb of Empire called the combat "sharp and instinctive",[124] and Hicks of Official Xbox Magazine felt that the cover system allows players to execute an attack plan.[121] In addition to the combat system, most reviewers noted the vehicle handling was more realistic than in previous games.[114][115][121] Robinson of Computer and Video Games felt that the vehicle handling echoed realism, while Hicks of Official Xbox Magazine called the vehicle selection "excellent".[112] Costantino of GameRevolution praised the improvement of the game's mechanics, particularly the physics engine's advanced vehicle and character animations.[122]

Reviewers praised the sound design. Goldstein of IGN praised the actors' performances and the use of licensed music. GameSpot's Calvert and GamesRadar's Walter also commended the licensed music, the latter admiring the humour of the radio's talk stations.[115][116] Michael Pinson of The Pro Audio Files praised the separate features of the sound design—including the city's ambiance, licensed music, character dialogue, and vehicle and weapon sound effects—applauding the developer's use of uniting the features together.[125] Carolyn Gudmundson of GamesRadar also retroactively praised the soundtrack, commending its suitability to the setting.[126]

The online multiplayer mode received positive reactions from critics.[12][116] Reiner of Game Informer praised the character customisation available in the multiplayer mode, and noted that it runs "just as smoothly" as the single-player game.[114] 1UP.com's Boyer called the multiplayer modes "excellent",[111] and IGN's Goldstein named it one of the best.[117] Official Xbox Magazine's Hicks dubbed the multiplayer as "hugely entertaining",[121] while Walter of GamesRadar praised the "seamless" process of entering a multiplayer match.[115] Giant Bomb's Gerstmann and GameRevolution's Costantino felt divided about the multiplayer, the latter naming it a "fantastic idea", but feeling as though connectivity problems resulted in a "broken" experience.[122][123]

Windows version
Windows version reception
Aggregate score
Aggregator	Score
Metacritic	90/100[110]
Review scores
Publication	Score
1Up.com	B[127]
Computer and Video Games	9.4/10[128]
Eurogamer	9/10[129]
GameSpot	9/10[1]
GameSpy	5/5[130]
IGN	9.2/10[131]
VideoGamer.com	10/10[132]
The Windows version received "universal acclaim", according to Metacritic.[110] Reviewers liked the enhanced visuals[128][132][133] and the additional features,[1][127][131][133] but criticised the port for its inferiority over the console versions.[127][129][131]

The in-game features added in the port were well received.[131][133] The addition of the Video Editor was met with positive reactions; GameSpot's Calvert called it "a great way to get creative",[1] while Kieron Gillen of Eurogamer criticised the unpredictability in its timing.[129] Critics also praised the addition of the customisable radio station, which allows players to listen to their own choice of music; Tom Chick of 1UP.com named it the best feature of the port,[127] and Steven Hopper of GameZone called it a "great touch".[133] The port's upgrade to 32 concurrent players in the online multiplayer mode, as opposed to the console version's 16 players, was also met with positive feedback; Eurogamer's Gillen said that the "possibility for mayhem... increases",[129] while Will Tuttle of GameSpy felt that the player increase "changes the action significantly".[130]

The port's enhanced visuals were commended by many reviewers. GameZone's Hopper considered the visuals an improvement over the original versions.[133] Andy Robinson of Computer and Video Games called the visuals "impressive",[128] while Tom Orry of VideoGamer.com called them "superb".[132] Conversely, the port's system requirements, considered difficult to run with advanced settings,[1] received criticism.[131][132] Eurogamer's Gillen said that, though the Windows version is "the most attractive version", it's "annoyingly fiddly to get there".[129] GameSpy's Tuttle was able to overlook the demanding system requirements in exchange for the game's other features.[130]

Awards

Michael Hollick won at the Spike Video Game Awards for his role as Niko Bellic.[134]
Grand Theft Auto IV earned awards from several critics and publications. It received Game of the Year awards from Digital Spy,[135] the Entertainment Merchants Association,[136] GameTrailers,[137] Giant Bomb,[138] IGN Australia,[139] Kotaku,[140] Los Angeles Times,[141] The New York Times,[142] and Time.[143] The game led the nominees at the 2008 Spike Video Game Awards with eight nominations;[144] it led the winners (tying with Metal Gear Solid 4: Guns of the Patriots) with three awards: Game of the Year, Best Action Adventure Game, and Best Performance by a Human Male for Michael Hollick's role as Niko.[134] The following year, The Ballad of Gay Tony won Best DLC.[145]

Grand Theft Auto IV was nominated for three awards at the 9th Game Developers Choice Awards including Game of the Year,[146] four at the 12th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards including Overall Game of the Year,[147] and seven at the 5th British Academy Games Awards, tying with Modern Warfare for the most nominations at the latter.[148] At IGN's Best of 2008, it won eleven awards, including Best Voice Acting across all three platforms and overall,[149][150][151][152] and Best Story for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.[153][154] It was nominated for Choice Video Game at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards.[155]

Award	Date	Category	Recipient(s) and nominee(s)	Result	Ref(s).
British Academy Games Awards	10 March 2009	Best Game	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated	[148]
Action and Adventure	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Story and Character	Dan Houser, Rupert Humphries	Nominated
Technical Achievement	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Gameplay	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Use of Audio	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
GAME Award of 2008	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Game Developers Choice Awards	26 March 2009	Game of the Year	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated	[146]
Best Technology	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Best Writing	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Interactive Achievement Awards	19 February 2009	Overall Game of the Year	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated	[147]
Console Game of the Year	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Action Game of the Year	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Outstanding Achievement in Original Story	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Spike Video Game Awards	14 December 2008	Game of the Year	Grand Theft Auto IV	Won	[134]
Best Action Adventure Game	Grand Theft Auto IV	Won
Best Male Voice	Michael Hollick as Niko Bellic	Won
Jason Zumwalt as Roman Bellic	Nominated	[144]
Studio of the Year	Rockstar North	Nominated
Best Soundtrack	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Best Xbox 360 Game	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Best PS3 Game	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated
Big Name in the Game Male	Ricky Gervais as himself	Nominated
12 December 2009	Best DLC	Grand Theft Auto: The Ballad of Gay Tony	Won	[145]
Grand Theft Auto IV: The Lost and Damned	Nominated
Teen Choice Awards	9 August 2009	Choice Video Game	Grand Theft Auto IV	Nominated	[155]
Sales
Within twenty-four hours of its release, Grand Theft Auto IV sold over 3.6 million copies, equating to approximately $310 million in revenue.[156] Within a week, it generated more than $500 million in worldwide revenue, equating to approximately 6 million copies sold for Take Two.[157][d] The numbers surpassed analysts' expectations for the title.[159][160][161] After one month of availability, the game had sold over 8.5 million copies.[162] It broke three Guinness World Records on 13 May 2008: highest grossing video game in 24 hours, highest revenue generated by an entertainment product in 24 hours, and fastest-selling video game in 24 hours.[163][e] On 11 March 2011, Take-Two announced that the game had sold over 20 million copies, with the Grand Theft Auto series surpassing a collective total of 100 million copies.[165] As of July 2013, the game has sold over 25 million copies, making it one of the best-selling video games, and one of the best-selling games on both PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.[166] All sales records broken by Grand Theft Auto IV were beaten by its successor, Grand Theft Auto V.[167]

In the United Kingdom, the game became the fastest-selling game of all time, selling over 631,000 copies in twenty-four hours.[168] This broke the record set by Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas at 501,000 copies over the same period.[169] During the first five days of availability, the game sold over 927,000 copies in the United Kingdom.[170][171] In the United States, Grand Theft Auto IV sold 2.85 million units in its first five days.[172] By the end of 2008, the game had sold over 5.18 million copies in the US.[173] In its first four days of availability in Japan, it sold 133,000 copies on the PlayStation 3 and 34,000 on the Xbox 360, according to Media Create.[174]

In the first week of availability, the Windows version of Grand Theft Auto IV debuted at seventh place on the weekly charts;[175] by the second week, it had left the top-ten.[176] Based on unique user counts, the game was the most played Games for Windows – Live game in 2009 and 2012,[177][178] and the second-most played in 2011.[179]

Controversies
Pre-release

Former attorney Jack Thompson, known for campaigning against titles from Rockstar Games, heavily criticised Grand Theft Auto IV prior to its release.[180][181][182]
In 2007, then-Florida lawyer Jack Thompson, known for his campaigns against the series, stated he would take measures to prevent the sale of Grand Theft Auto IV to minors.[180] On 14 March, Take-Two filed a lawsuit against Thompson to preemptively restrict his attempts to ban the game from sale.[183] Thompson responded by filing a countersuit accusing Take-Two of violating federal RICO statutes, committing perjury and obstruction of justice, and conspiring to deprive him of his civil rights.[184] On 20 April, both parties reached a settlement agreeing to drop their lawsuits:[185] Thompson was barred from suing to ban the sale or distribution of Take-Two's games but able to act as counsel in lawsuits by other parties, while Take-Two agreed to drop the contempt of court lawsuit against Thompson regarding alleged improper conduct during the court hearings for Rockstar's game Bully (2006).[181]

On 18 September 2007, Thompson filed a document with a federal court in Florida, claiming the assassination target of a mission in Grand Theft Auto IV is a lawyer character based upon himself. He threatened to "take necessary and proper means to stop release of the game" if the similarities were not removed.[186] In April 2008, Thompson wrote a letter directed to the mother of Take-Two chairman Strauss Zelnick, in which he labelled Grand Theft Auto a "murder simulator" and criticised Zelnick's upbringing, comparing his Boy Scouts experience to Hitler Youth.[182][187] Thompson subsequently claimed he sent the letter to Zelnick's lawyer, formulating it as a parody to induce "shame" in Zelnick.[182]

Following the release of the first trailer in March 2007, New York City officials criticised the choice of their city as inspiration for Liberty City; Peter Vallone Jr., chairman of the council's public safety committee, compared it to "setting Halo in Disneyland", and Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly called it "despicable to glamorize violence in games like these".[188] A spokesman for mayor Michael Bloomberg said "the mayor does not support any video game where you earn points for injuring or killing police officers".[188] Jason Della Rocca, executive director of the International Game Developers Association, accused city officials of double standards for criticising video games but avoiding the argument for books, films, and television series set in the city.[189]

Post-release
Player character drives a car while intoxicated. The gameplay vision is shaky and blurred.
The ability to drink-drive in Grand Theft Auto IV was criticised by Mothers Against Drunk Driving, who requested the rating be changed.[190]
In April 2008, non-profit organisation Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) criticised the ability to drink-drive in the game. MADD requested the Entertainment Software Rating Board change the rating of the game to "Adults Only", effectively removing it from sale.[190] They asked Take-Two and Rockstar to consider halting distribution out of a sense of social responsibility and respect for victims of driving under the influence.[190] Rockstar said it respected MADD's work but felt the game's audience "is more than sophisticated enough to understand the game's content", adding "you can't judge Grand Theft Auto IV by a small aspect of the game".[191]

On his program in May 2008, conservative American radio host Glenn Beck used the game as an example of violence in video games "training our kids to be killers", erroneously stating the player can attack police officers with a chainsaw;[192][193] Kombo's David Oxford rebutted that the game is not targeted at children.[193] Beck said games like Grand Theft Auto IV were being used to make militaries more violent; Destructoid's James Stephanie Sterling countered that violent wars occurred prior to the creation of video games.[192] Computer and Video Games's Robinson compared Beck's "rant" to the game's satirical radio shows.[194]

There is nothing in the game you would not see in a TV show, or a movie a hundred times over ... We set out to make games that felt like they could culturally exist alongside the movies we were watching and the books we were reading

— Dan Houser, writer, May 2008[39]
In June 2008, six teenagers who were arrested for robbery in New Hyde Park, New York, claimed they were inspired by Grand Theft Auto IV, according to the Nassau County Police Department.[195] In August, an 18-year-old student was arrested in Bangkok for the murder of a taxi driver after attempting to hijack the vehicle; according to the police captain, the student "wanted to find out if it was as easy in real life to rob a taxi as it was in the game".[196] The game was subsequently banned in Thailand.[196] In August 2013, 87-year-old Marie Smothers was killed in Slaughter, Louisiana, when her eight-year-old grandson shot her in the head with a handgun after playing Grand Theft Auto IV; under state law, the boy could not be charged for her death due to his age.[197]

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Grand Theft Auto V

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Featured article
Page semi-protected
Listen to this article
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Grand Theft Auto V
Video game cover art featuring a collage of various characters and scenarios
Developer(s)	Rockstar North[a]
Publisher(s)	Rockstar Games
Producer(s)	Leslie Benzies
Designer(s)	
Leslie Benzies
Imran Sarwar
Programmer(s)	Adam Fowler
Artist(s)	Aaron Garbut
Writer(s)	
Dan Houser
Rupert Humphries
Michael Unsworth
Composer(s)	
Tangerine Dream
Woody Jackson
The Alchemist
Oh No
Series	Grand Theft Auto
Engine	RAGE
Platform(s)	
PlayStation 3
Xbox 360
PlayStation 4
Xbox One
Windows
PlayStation 5
Xbox Series X/S
Release	
17 September 2013
Genre(s)	Action-adventure
Mode(s)	Single-player, multiplayer
Grand Theft Auto V is a 2013 action-adventure game developed by Rockstar North and published by Rockstar Games. It is the seventh main entry in the Grand Theft Auto series, following 2008's Grand Theft Auto IV, and the fifteenth instalment overall. Set within the fictional state of San Andreas, based on Southern California, the single-player story follows three protagonists—retired bank robber Michael De Santa (Ned Luke), street gangster Franklin Clinton (Shawn Fonteno), and drug dealer and gunrunner Trevor Philips (Steven Ogg), and their attempts to commit heists while under pressure from a corrupt government agency and powerful criminals. Players freely roam San Andreas's open world countryside and fictional city of Los Santos, based on Los Angeles.

The game world is navigated on foot and by vehicle, from either a third-person or first-person perspective. Players control the protagonists throughout single-player and switch among them, both during and outside missions. The story is centred on the heist sequences, and many missions involve shooting and driving gameplay. A "wanted" system governs the aggression of law enforcement response to players who commit crimes. In Grand Theft Auto Online, the game's online multiplayer mode, up to 30 players engage in a variety of different cooperative and competitive game modes.

Shared between many of Rockstar's studios worldwide, the game's development began around the time of Grand Theft Auto IV's release. The developers drew influence from many of their previous projects (such as Red Dead Redemption and Max Payne 3) and designed the game around three lead protagonists to innovate on the core structure of its predecessors. Much of the development work constituted the open world's creation, and several team members conducted field research around California to capture footage for the design team. The game's soundtrack features an original score composed by a team of producers who collaborated over several years. Grand Theft Auto V was released in September 2013 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360, in November 2014 for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, in April 2015 for Windows, and in March 2022 for the PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S.

Extensively marketed and widely anticipated, the game broke industry sales records and became the fastest-selling entertainment product in history, earning $800 million in its first day and $1 billion in its first three days. It received critical acclaim, with praise directed at its multiple-protagonist design, open world, presentation and gameplay. However, its depiction of violence and women caused controversies. Several gaming publications awarded the game year-end accolades including Game of the Year awards. In retrospect, it is considered one of seventh and eighth generation console gaming's most significant titles and among the best video games ever made. It is the second-best-selling video game of all time with 210 million copies shipped, and one of the most financially successful entertainment products of all time, with over $8.5 billion in worldwide revenue. Its successor, Grand Theft Auto VI, is scheduled to be released in 2025.

Gameplay
Grand Theft Auto V is an action-adventure game[2] played from either a third-person[3] or first-person perspective.[b] Players complete missions—linear scenarios with set objectives—to progress through the story.[5] Outside of the missions, players may freely roam the open world. Composed of the San Andreas open countryside area, and its fictional Blaine County and city of Los Santos, the world is much larger in area than earlier entries in the series.[6][c] It may be fully explored after the game's beginning without restriction, although story progress unlocks more gameplay content.[8]

The player character crouched behind a vehicle while in combat. The head-up display elements are visible on-screen.
Players can take cover behind objects during firefights to avoid taking damage from enemies.[9]
Players use melee attacks, firearms and explosives to fight enemies,[d] and may run, jump, swim or use vehicles to navigate the world.[e] To accommodate the map's size, the game introduces vehicle types absent in its predecessor Grand Theft Auto IV, such as fixed-wing aircraft.[12] In combat, auto-aim and a cover system may be used to assist against enemies.[9] Should players take damage, their health meter will gradually regenerate to its halfway point.[f] Players respawn at hospitals when their health depletes.[11] If players commit crimes, law enforcement may respond as indicated by a "wanted" meter in the heads-up display (HUD).[13] Stars displayed on the meter indicate the current wanted level (for example, at the maximum five-star level, police helicopters and SWAT teams swarm to lethally dispatch players).[14][g] Officers will search for players who leave the wanted vicinity. The meter enters a cool-down mode and eventually recedes when players are hidden from the officers' line of sight that displays on the mini-map for a period of time.[16][h]

In the single-player mode, players control three characters: Michael De Santa, Trevor Philips and Franklin Clinton—criminals whose stories interconnect as they complete missions. Some missions are completed with only one character and others feature two or three.[18] Outside the missions, players may switch between characters at will by a directional compass on the HUD, although this feature is restricted at certain points during the story. During missions, characters may automatically switch to complete specific objectives. A character's compass avatar will flash red if he is in danger and needs help, and flash white if he has a strategic advantage.[19] Though players complete missions with the protagonists, the more difficult heist missions require aid from AI-controlled accomplices with unique skill sets like computer hacking and driving. If an accomplice survives a successful heist, they take a cut from the cash reward[20] and may be available for later missions with improvements to their unique skills.[21] Some heists afford multiple strategies; in a holdup mission, players may either stealthily subdue civilians with an incapacitating agent or conspicuously storm the venue with guns drawn.[22]

Each character has a set of eight skills that represent their ability in specific areas such as shooting and driving. Though skills improve through play, each character has a skill with expertise by default (e.g. Trevor's flying skill).[23] The eighth "special" skill determines proficiency in an ability that is unique to each respective character. Michael enters bullet time in combat, Franklin slows down time while driving, and Trevor deals twice as much damage to enemies while taking half as much in combat.[24] A meter on each character's HUD depletes when an ability is being used and regenerates when players perform skilful actions (for example, drifting in vehicles as Franklin or performing headshots as Michael).[25]

While free-roaming the game world, players may engage in context-specific activities such as scuba diving and BASE jumping, and visit businesses such as cinemas and strip clubs. Each character has a smartphone for contacting friends, starting activities and accessing an in-game Internet.[26] The Internet lets players trade in stocks via a stock market.[27] Players may purchase properties such as garages and businesses, upgrade the weapons and vehicles in each character's arsenal, and customise their appearance by purchasing outfits, haircuts and tattoos.[28]

Plot
In 2004,[i] criminals Michael Townley, Trevor Philips, and Brad Snider partake in a failed robbery in Ludendorff, North Yankton, resulting in Michael being presumed dead. Nine years later, Michael lives with his family in the city of Los Santos under the alias Michael De Santa, having made a secret agreement with a Federal Investigation Bureau (FIB)[j] agent, Dave Norton, to stay hidden. Across town, gangbanger Franklin Clinton works for a corrupt car salesman and meets Michael while attempting to fraudulently repossess his son's car. The two later become friends. When Michael finds his wife sleeping with her tennis coach, he and Franklin chase the coach to a mansion, which Michael wrecks in anger. The owner of the mansion, drug lord Martin Madrazo, demands compensation for the damage, so Michael returns to a life of crime to obtain the money, enlisting Franklin as an accomplice. With the help of Michael's old friend Lester Crest, a disabled hacker, they rob a jewellery store to pay off the debt. Meanwhile, Trevor, who lives in squalor in rural Blaine County, hears of the heist and recognises Michael's work; Trevor had believed the FIB killed Michael in the Ludendorff heist. Trevor finds Michael and reunites with him, forcing the latter to reluctantly accept the former back into his life.

As time goes on, the protagonists' lives spiral out of control. Michael's criminal behaviour prompts his family to leave him. When he later becomes a movie producer, he comes into conflict with Devin Weston, a billionaire venture capitalist and corporate raider, who attempts to shut down Michael's studio. Michael thwarts his efforts and inadvertently kills his lawyer, to which Devin vows revenge. Meanwhile, Franklin has to rescue his friend Lamar Davis from rival gangbanger Harold "Stretch" Joseph, who attempts to kill him multiple times. Concurrently, Trevor tries to consolidate his control over various black markets in Blaine County, waging war against The Lost outlaw motorcycle club, Latino street gangs, rival meth dealers, the private military company Merryweather, and triad kingpin Wei Cheng.

Having broken his agreement with Dave by committing robberies again, Michael is coerced by Dave and his superior, Steve Haines, to perform a series of operations alongside Franklin and Trevor to undermine the International Affairs Agency (IAA).[k] Under Steve's direction and with Lester's help, they attack an armored car carrying funds for the IAA and steal an experimental nerve agent from an IAA lab. As Steve comes under increasing scrutiny, he forces Michael and Franklin to break into the FIB building and erase evidence against him from the servers. Michael takes the opportunity to wipe the data on his activities, destroying Steve's leverage over him.

After reconciling with his family, Michael starts planning his final heist with Trevor, Franklin, and Lester: raiding the Union Depository's gold bullion reserve. However, Trevor discovers that Brad was not imprisoned as he was led to believe, but killed during the Ludendorff heist and buried in the grave marked for Michael. Deducing the heist was a setup and that he was supposed to be killed in Brad's place, Trevor feels betrayed and leaves Michael for dead during a shootout with Cheng's henchmen. Although Franklin rescues Michael, Trevor's anger towards the latter causes friction within the group and threatens to undermine their plans. Meanwhile, Steve attempts to arrest Michael, but they, alongside Dave, become caught in a Mexican standoff between the FIB, the IAA, and Merryweather. Steve escapes while Michael and Dave are saved by Trevor, who believes only he has the right to kill Michael.

The Union Depository heist is successful, but Franklin is afterwards approached by Steve and Dave, who contend that Trevor is a liability, and Devin, still seeking vengeance on Michael. Franklin has three options: kill Trevor, kill Michael, or attempt to save both in a suicide mission. Should Franklin choose to kill either Michael or Trevor, his relationship with the other ceases, and he returns to his old life.[31][32] Otherwise, the trio, aided by Lamar and Lester, withstand an onslaught from the FIB and Merryweather before going on to kill Cheng, Stretch, Steve, and Devin. Michael and Trevor reconcile, and the three protagonists cease working together but remain friends.[33]

Development
Main article: Development of Grand Theft Auto V

Shawn Fonteno

Ned Luke

Steven Ogg
Fonteno, Luke, and Ogg (pictured in 2024) portray the game's three protagonists, Franklin Clinton, Michael De Santa, and Trevor Philips, respectively.[34]
Rockstar North began to develop Grand Theft Auto V in 2008, around Grand Theft Auto IV's release.[35] The development team totalled more than 1,000 people, including Rockstar North's core team and staff from parent company Rockstar Games' studios around the world.[36] The proprietary Rockstar Advanced Game Engine (RAGE) was overhauled for the game to improve its draw distance rendering capabilities.[37] The Euphoria and Bullet software handle additional animation and rendering tasks.[38] Having become familiar with the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 hardware over time, Rockstar found they were able to push the consoles' graphical capabilities further than in previous games.[39] Analyst estimations place the game's combined development and marketing budget at more than £170 million (US$265 million), which would make it the most expensive game ever made at that time.[40][l]

The open world was modelled on Southern California and Los Angeles,[42] and its design and in-game render constituted much of the game's early work.[43] Key members of the game world production team took field research trips throughout the region and documented their research with photo and video footage.[39] Google Maps projections of Los Angeles were used by the team to help design Los Santos's road networks.[44][45] To reflect and reproduce Los Angeles's demographic spread, the developers studied census data and watched documentaries about the city.[37] The team considered creating the open world the most technically demanding aspect of the game's production.[46]

A fundamental design goal from the outset was to innovate on the series' core structure by giving players control of three lead protagonists instead of one.[43] The idea was first raised during Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas' development, but contemporaneous hardware restrictions made it infeasible.[35] Having developed two Grand Theft Auto IV episodic expansion packs featuring new protagonists in 2009, the team wanted to base Grand Theft Auto V around three simultaneously controlled protagonists.[12] The team viewed it as a spiritual successor to many of their previous games (such as Grand Theft Auto IV, Red Dead Redemption and Max Payne 3), and designed it to improve upon their gameplay mechanics.[19][47] They sought to improve the action gameplay by refining the shooting mechanics and cover system[48] and reworked the driving mechanics to correct Grand Theft Auto IV's awkward vehicle controls.[49]

After an audition process, Ned Luke, Shawn Fonteno and Steven Ogg were selected to portray Michael, Franklin and Trevor, respectively.[34] Their performances were mostly recorded using motion capture technology,[50] but dialogue for scenes with characters seated in vehicles was recorded in studios instead.[51] The game's original score was composed by a team of producers who collaborated over several years.[52] Licensed music provided by an in-game radio is also used.[53] The team licensed more than 241 tracks shared between fifteen radio stations, with an additional two stations providing talk radio.[m] Some of the tracks were written specifically for the game, such as rapper and producer Flying Lotus' original work composed for the FlyLo FM radio station he hosts.[55]

Release
Rockstar Games announced the game on 25 October 2011.[56] They released its debut trailer one week later,[57] with an official press release acknowledging its setting.[58] Journalists noted the widespread industry anticipation ignited by the announcement, which they owed to the series' cultural significance.[59][60][61] The game missed its original projected Q2 2013 release date, pushed back to 17 September to allow for further polishing.[62] To spur pre-order game sales, Rockstar collaborated with several retail outlets to make a special edition with extra in-game features.[63] They ran a viral marketing strategy with a website for a fictional religious cult, "The Epsilon Program", that offered users the chance to feature in the game as members of the cult.[64]

The city of Los Santos being rendered on the PlayStation 4 on the left, and the PlayStation 3 on the right. Improved texture effects, lighting and draw distances are visible on the PS4 version.
A comparison of the PlayStation 4 (left) and PlayStation 3 versions of the game. The enhanced re-release features greater draw distances and higher-resolution textures than the original versions.[65]
A re-release of the game was announced for PlayStation 4, Windows (PC), and Xbox One at E3 2014. This enhanced version features an increased draw distance, finer texture details, denser traffic, upgraded weather effects, and new wildlife and vegetation.[65] It includes a new on-foot first-person view option, which required the development team to overhaul the animation system to accommodate first-person gameplay.[4] The PlayStation 4 and Xbox One versions were released on 18 November 2014.[66] The PC version, initially scheduled for simultaneous release with the console versions,[65] was delayed until 14 April 2015.[67] According to Rockstar, it required extra development time for "polish".[68] The PC version is capable of 60 frames per second gameplay at 4K resolution, and the Rockstar Editor lets players capture and edit gameplay videos.[69]

Plans to develop single-player downloadable content (DLC) were later scrapped as the team focused resources on Grand Theft Auto Online and Red Dead Redemption 2.[70] After Grand Theft Auto V's source code reportedly leaked online on 24 December 2023, possibly originating from members of Lapsus$,[71] dataminers found at least eight sets of single-player DLC were in development but cancelled, including a Liberty City expansion.[72]

A new version, commonly referred to as "Expanded & Enhanced", was announced in June 2020.[73] Released on 15 March 2022 for PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S,[74] it features technical enhancements and performance updates.[73] A trailer released for the new version in September 2021 was met with negativity, becoming one of the most-disliked videos on PlayStation's YouTube channel;[75] journalists noted that fans were frustrated by Rockstar's continued focus on the game instead of other projects such as a new Grand Theft Auto game, as well as an lack of apparent new features demonstrated in the trailer.[76][77][78][79] The PC version received the enhancements in a free update on 4 March 2025.[80]

Grand Theft Auto Online
Main article: Grand Theft Auto Online
Developed in tandem with the single-player mode, the online multiplayer mode Grand Theft Auto Online was conceived as a separate experience to be played in a continually evolving world.[81] Up to 30 players[n] freely roam across the game world and enter lobbies to complete jobs (story-driven competitive and cooperative modes).[82] The Content Creator toolset lets players create their own parameters for custom jobs, like racetracks and deathmatch weapon spawn points.[83] Players may band together in organised player teams called crews to complete jobs together. Rockstar Games Social Club extends crews formed in Max Payne 3's multiplayer mode to those of Grand Theft Auto Online. Players may create their own crews and join up to five total. Crews win multiplayer matches to earn experience points and climb online leaderboards.[84]

Grand Theft Auto Online launched on 1 October 2013, two weeks after Grand Theft Auto V's release.[85] Many players reported connection difficulties and game freezes during load screens.[86][87] Rockstar released a technical patch on 5 October in an effort to resolve the issues,[88] but problems persisted the second week as some players reported their character progress as having disappeared.[89] Another technical patch was released on 10 October combating the issues,[90] and Rockstar offered a GTA$500,000 (in-game currency) stimulus to the accounts of all players connected to Online since launch as recompense.[91] Because of the widespread technical issues present at launch, many reviewers bemoaned their Grand Theft Auto Online experience but generally recognised its open-ended exploration and dynamic content as strengths.[92][93][94][95][96]

Post-release content is continually added to Grand Theft Auto Online through free title updates. Some updates add new game modes and features,[97][98] and others feature themed gameplay content, such as the Independence Day Special update that added patriotic-themed content on 1 July 2014.[99] The widely anticipated[100][101] Online Heists update launched on 10 March 2015 and suffered some initial technical difficulties due to the increased user load.[102] Shortly after the game's PC release, some players reported being banned from Grand Theft Auto Online for using field of view and cosmetic mods in single-player.[103] Rockstar stated in their official blog that nobody had been banned from Online for using single-player mods, but that recent updates to the PC version had the "unintentional effect" of making such mods unplayable. They stated that mods are unauthorised and may cause unforeseen technical problems and instabilities.[104]

Reception
Initial release
Reception
Aggregate score
Aggregator	Score
Metacritic	97/100[105][106]
Review scores
Publication	Score
Edge	10/10[107]
Eurogamer	9/10[108]
Famitsu	40/40[110]
Game Informer	9.75/10[109]
GameSpot	9/10[111]
GamesRadar+	5/5[112]
IGN	10/10[113]
Joystiq	4.5/5[114]
Play	97/100[115]
The Escapist	3.5/5[116]
Grand Theft Auto V received "universal acclaim" from critics, according to review aggregator Metacritic, based on 50 reviews for the PlayStation 3 version[105] and 58 reviews for the Xbox 360 version.[106] The game is Metacritic's fifth-highest rated, tied with several others.[117] Reviewers liked the multiple lead character formula,[109][113][118] heist mission design[119][120][121] and presentation,[16][115][122] but some did not agree on the quality of the story and characters.[108][114][116][123] IGN called Grand Theft Auto V "one of the very best video games ever made",[113] and Play considered it "generation-defining" and "exceptional".[115] Edge wrote that it is a "remarkable achievement" in open-world design and storytelling,[124] while The Daily Telegraph declared it a "colossal feat of technical engineering".[125] It became the second-ever western-developed game to be awarded a perfect score from the Japanese video game magazine Famitsu, after The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim.[126]

CNET felt that the game encouraged players to engage with all three characters.[127] Edge found that switching players helped avoid long travel times to mission start points.[118] Because of the switching mechanic, Game Informer noted that players are kept "in the thick of the action" during shootouts.[109] Eurogamer wrote that switching added a tactical element to shootouts as characters set up in strategic outposts would cause fewer "shooting gallery" situations than previous instalments.[108] IGN felt the switching feature gave players more choice in their approach and made missions less predictable.[113]

Giant Bomb considered the heist missions a welcome deviation from series typical mission structure.[119] Eurogamer likened them to "blockbuster set-pieces",[108] and GameSpot cited the 1995 film Heat as a stylistic influence on their design.[111] Joystiq felt creativity and methodical approaches were encouraged.[114] Polygon likened rapid character switching during heist missions to "film editing, with the player serving as editor, switching rapidly to the most interesting perspective for any moment".[120] Computer and Video Games felt that overall mission design was more diverse than and lacked the escort errands of its predecessors.[121]

The player character with their back to the camera, and the sprawl of an urban city centre in front of them.
Los Santos, the city featured in the game's open world. Reviewers praised its design and similarity to Los Angeles.[16][108][128] The departure from Grand Theft Auto IV's Liberty City was well received.[113][122]
Edge praised the game's graphical fidelity and absence of load screens.[118] Play complimented the draw distances and weather and lighting systems.[115] In Eurogamer's view, the lighting system was the game's most significant advancement.[108] Official Xbox Magazine (OXM) thought that the game was "probably the Xbox 360's greatest technical achievement", and was surprised that the open world could render on the console.[123] Reviewers lauded the open-world design and its streamlining of Los Angeles's geography into a well-designed city space.[16][108] GameTrailers considered the Los Angeles emulation authentic and the open world "full of voice and personality".[128] IGN and PlayStation Official Magazine (OPM) made favourable comparisons between Los Santos and Grand Theft Auto IV's Liberty City.[113][122] OXM felt Los Santos surpassed the "grey and gritty" Liberty City.[123] Reviewers praised the world's satire of contemporary American culture[16][108][113][114][121]—OPM opined that "the scathing social commentary is, of course, present and correct".[122]

Destructoid called the sound design "impeccable" and praised the actors' performances, original soundtrack and licensed music use.[16] IGN and Giant Bomb commended the music selection and felt that the original score enhanced dramatic tension during missions.[113][119] GameSpot wrote that the score "lends missions more cinematic flavour".[111] Edge said that the licensed music enhanced the city's "already remarkable sense of space" and that the original score improved the atmosphere of the gameplay. They summarised the game as "a compendium of everything Rockstar has learnt about the power of game music in the past decade".[129]

Many reviewers found the land-based vehicles more responsive and easier to control than in previous games.[111][115][122][123][124] Game Informer explained that "cars have a proper sense of weight, while retaining the agility necessary for navigating through traffic at high speeds".[109] In addition to the vehicle handling, most reviewers noted the shooting mechanics were tighter than they had been in previous games,[109][111][113] but Destructoid felt that in spite of the improvements, auto-aim was "twitchy and unreliable" and cover mechanics "still come off as dated and unwieldy".[16] Some reviewers felt the game solved a persistent problem by adding mid-mission checkpoints.[108][113][125]

The story and characters—particularly Trevor—polarised reviewers. Some found the narrative inferior to previous Rockstar games and cited Grand Theft Auto IV and Red Dead Redemption's plot strengths.[108][109][114][123] Others thought the protagonists' contrasting personalities tightened the narrative's pacing.[16][113][118][120] GamesRadar thought the game negated the story inconsistencies and muddled morality of previous series entries.[112] Trevor was considered a particularly "horrible, terrifying, psychotic human being—and a terrific character" by GameSpot.[111] Eurogamer found Trevor "shallow and unconvincing", and that his eccentricities hurt the narrative and overshadowed Michael and Franklin's character development.[108] Joystiq faulted the protagonists' perceived lack of likability, as the conflict between Michael and Trevor grew into a "seemingly endless cycle".[114] The Escapist had difficulty connecting with the characters' emotions since they acted out of greed with no sense of morality and thus gave players little reason to support them.[116]

Re-release
Re-release reception
Aggregate scores
Aggregator	Score
Metacritic	(PS4) 97/100[130]
(XONE) 97/100[131]
(PC) 96/100[132]
(PS5) 81/100[133]
(XSXS) 79/100[134]
OpenCritic	92%[135]
Review scores
Publication	Score
Game Informer	9.75/10[137]
GameSpot	9/10[136]
IGN	10/10[138][139]
PC Gamer (US)	92%[140]
VideoGamer.com	10/10[141][142]
Grand Theft Auto V's re-release, similarly, received critical acclaim. It is the highest-rated PlayStation 4 and Xbox One game on Metacritic alongside Rockstar's Red Dead Redemption 2,[143][144] and the second-highest rated PC game alongside several others.[145]

Game Informer considered the addition of first-person "another significant breakthrough for the series" in the vein of Grand Theft Auto III's shift to third-person from Grand Theft Auto's bird's-eye view.[137] GameSpot found that playing in first-person heightened the impact of Grand Theft Auto V's violence, which made him reflect on morality and character motivation more than before.[136] VideoGamer.com opined that players feel like inhabitants of the world, rather than "guns attached to a floating camera".[141] The first-person view, in IGN's opinion, aided immersion and created a "surprisingly different experience".[138] VideoGamer.com praised the "finer details" in first-person animations like camera lean when players take corners on motorcycles, or the navigational instruments in plane cockpits.[141] Reviewers found playing the game more difficult in first-person,[136][138] but Game Informer preferred the challenge.[137]

GameSpot thought the improved graphics and spatial anti-aliasing made the open world "even more spectacular". They said that in first-person "everything looks bigger and more imposing".[136] IGN favoured the PlayStation 4 version's graphics over the Xbox One but thought both consoles rendered the game well and maintained mostly consistent frame rates.[138] They praised the increased frame rate and graphics options offered in the PC version.[146] VideoGamer.com called the console version's frame rate so consistent it was "scarcely believable",[141] although GameSpot cited occasional frame rate dips.[136] They opined that the PC version let players "witness the full extent of Rockstar's admirable handiwork", but noted that it "retains evidence of its last-gen roots ... with simple geometry".[136] VideoGamer.com praised the Rockstar Editor's accessibility on PC but criticised some of its limitations and camera angle restrictions.[142] IGN appreciated the PC version's customisable controls,[146] and GameSpot felt that constant switching between the mouse and keyboard and a gamepad was necessary for "the best experience".[136] PC Gamer called the game "the most beautiful, expansive and generous" of the series.[140]

On the game's multiplayer, IGN reported low player counts in matches, long wait times in lobbies, server disconnection and occasional crashes. "Because of that," they wrote, "I can't strongly recommend ... the multiplayer experience alone".[138] VideoGamer.com found online character progression streamlined by comparison with the original version. According to them, the "grind of just doing PvP until co-op Jobs arrive with regularity"[141] was lost, and newcomers would likely find multiplayer enjoyable and balanced. However, they wrote of frequent server disconnection, especially during load screens.[141] GameSpot thought the online mode was fun but "still suffers from a lack of direction" for its open-ended and frenetic gameplay.[136] Game Informer reported "minimal lag or issues in the expanded firefights and races".[137]

The PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series releases received tepid responses from critics, who questioned the value proposition of a new version of the ageing title. While the improved visual fidelity and quicker loading times were singled out for praise, reviewers generally found the core gameplay, storytelling and character models dated.[147][148][149][150] Hardcore Gamer thought the lack of new content made the upgrade difficult to recommend to PlayStation 4 and Xbox One players.[147] GamingBolt was apathetic towards the visual enhancements but praised the increased accessibility for Online newcomers.[148] Jeuxvideo.com thought the release offered the supreme console experience and highlighted the improved graphics and load times.[149] Push Square faulted the antiquated humour but thought the visual and technical enhancements gave the "sunny sandbox a new lease of life".[150]

Awards
Grand Theft Auto V received multiple nominations and awards from gaming publications. Before release, it won Most Anticipated Game at the 2012 Spike Video Game Awards.[59] The game was review aggregators Metacritic and GameRankings's highest-rated for the year 2013.[151][152] The game appeared on several year-end lists of 2013's best games, receiving Game of the Year wins from independent journalist Tom Chick,[153] CNET,[154] Edge,[155] the 31st Golden Joystick Awards,[156] the 5th Annual Inside Gaming Awards,[157] the Spike VGX 2013 Awards,[158] Slant Magazine[159] and Time.[160] It was named the Best Xbox Game by Canada.com,[161] GameSpot,[162] and IGN,[163] and the Best Multiplatform Game by Destructoid.[164] Rockstar Games and Rockstar North won Best Studio and Best Developer from Edge,[165] and the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award at the 10th British Academy Video Games Awards.[166]

Various in-game elements were recognised with awards. Trevor was named Best Character for the Official Xbox Magazine's Game of the Year Awards 2013,[167] while Lamar Davis won the Best New Character award from Giant Bomb.[168] The music received awards from Spike VGX,[158] Hardcore Gamer[169] and The Daily Telegraph.[170] Grand Theft Auto Online won Best Multiplayer from GameTrailers[171] and BAFTA,[166] and Best Xbox 360 Multiplayer from IGN.[172] Online was also nominated for Biggest Disappointment by Game Revolution[173] and Hardcore Gamer.[174] Grand Theft Auto V won Best Technical Achievement in the Telegraph Video Game Awards,[170] and Best Technology at the 14th Annual Game Developers Choice Awards.[175] The graphical and artistic design received awards from IGN,[176] The Daily Telegraph[170] and BAFTA,[166] and a nomination at the Game Developers Choice Awards.[175] The Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences awarded the game with Outstanding Achievement in Gameplay Engineering, signifying "the highest level of achievement for engineering artificial intelligence and related elements which contribute to a challenging game".[177]

The game received numerous other awards. It was awarded the title of Most Immersive Game at the Inside Gaming Awards.[157] The general public voted for the game to win the User Choice Award at the PlayStation Awards 2013[178] and the Community Choice award from Destructoid.[179] The game received the Platinum Award at the PlayStation Awards[178] and was named the Best British Game from BAFTA.[166] At IGN's Best of 2013 Awards, it earned multiple wins, including Best Xbox 360 Graphics,[176] Best Xbox 360 Sound,[180] and Best Action Game on Xbox 360,[163] PlayStation 3[181] and overall.[182]

Date	Award	Category	Recipient(s) and nominee(s)	Result	Ref.
7 December 2012	Spike Video Game Awards	Most Anticipated Game	Grand Theft Auto V	Won	[59]
25 October 2013	Golden Joystick Awards	Game of the Year	Won	[156]
2 December 2013	Satellite Awards	Outstanding Action / Adventure Video Game	Nominated	[183]
7 December 2013	Spike VGX	Game of the Year	Won	[158]
Best Soundtrack	Won
Studio of the Year	Rockstar North	Nominated	[184]
Best Action Adventure Game	Grand Theft Auto V	Nominated
Best Xbox Game	Nominated
Best PlayStation Game	Nominated
Best Voice Actor	Steven Ogg as Trevor Philips	Nominated
Best Song in a Game	"A.D.H.D" by Kendrick Lamar	Nominated
"Sleepwalking" by The Chain Gang of 1974	Nominated
Character of the Year	Trevor Philips	Nominated
9 January 2014	Game Developers Choice Awards	Game of the Year	Grand Theft Auto V	Nominated	[175]
Best Technology	Won
Best Audio	Nominated
Best Design	Nominated
6 February 2014	D.I.C.E. Awards	Game of the Year	Nominated	[185]
Outstanding Achievement in Game Direction	Nominated
Outstanding Achievement in Gameplay Engineering	Won
Outstanding Achievement in Visual Engineering	Nominated
Outstanding Achievement in Sound Design	Nominated
Outstanding Innovation in Gaming	Nominated
Outstanding Character Performance	Trevor Philips	Nominated
13 March 2014	British Academy Video Games Awards	Best Game	Grand Theft Auto V	Nominated	[166]
Action & Adventure	Nominated
Audio Achievement	Nominated
British Game	Won
Game Design	Won
Game Innovation	Nominated
Multiplayer	Grand Theft Auto Online	Won
Performer	Steven Ogg as Trevor Philips	Nominated
Story	Grand Theft Auto V	Nominated
5 December 2014	The Game Awards	Best Remaster	Won	[186]
31 December 2016	The Steam Awards	"Whoooaaaaaaa, dude!"	Won	[187]
"Game Within a Game"	Won
8 February 2019	Labor of Love	Won	[188]
31 December 2019	Won	[189]
15 November 2019	Golden Joystick Awards	Best Game Expansion	Grand Theft Auto Online – The Diamond Casino & Resort	Won	[190]
24 November 2020	Still Playing	Grand Theft Auto Online	Nominated	[191]
23 November 2021	Still Playing Award	Nominated	[192]
14 March 2022	The Streamer Awards	Stream Game of the Year	Grand Theft Auto V	Nominated	[193]
10 November 2023	Golden Joystick Awards	Still Playing Award	Grand Theft Auto Online	Nominated	[194]
17 February 2024	The Streamer Awards	Stream Game of the Year	Grand Theft Auto V	Nominated	[195]
21 November 2024	Golden Joystick Awards	Still Playing Award – PC and Console	Grand Theft Auto Online	Nominated	[196]
Controversies
A man is strapped to an overturned chair with a cloth concealing his face. Player character Trevor stands over him with a canister, about to pour water on his face. A text prompt in the upper left-hand corner reads "Hold [left stick] to pour water."
The mission "By the Book" requires players to use torture techniques including waterboarding to interrogate a man. Journalists noted the mission's function as political commentary, but some felt that the use of torture was in poor taste.[111][113][120]
The mission "By the Book", which requires players to use torture equipment in a hostage interrogation, unsettled reviewers. They noted its political commentary on the use of torture by the United States government but found the sequence to be in poor taste.[113][120] GameSpot felt that placing the torture scene in context with an analogous monologue by Trevor created a hypocrisy in the mission's function as a commentary device.[111] Eurogamer felt the close-up camera and quick time events accentuated the sequence's impact beyond the violence depicted in previous Grand Theft Auto games, and considered the sequence lacking enough context to justify its violence.[197] The mission received criticism from politicians and anti-torture charity groups.[198] Independent journalist Tom Chick defended the torture sequence, and wrote that unlike Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2's "No Russian" mission or the 2012 film Zero Dark Thirty, the underlying political commentary on torture in "By the Book" necessitated the violent content.[30] The torture gameplay was cut from the Japanese release.[199][200]

Several reviewers found the game's portrayal of women misogynistic;[120][201] VG247 wrote the female characters were "either there to be rescued, shouted at, fucked, to be seen fucking, put up with, killed, heard prattling away like dullards on their mobile phones or shopping".[202] Edge noted the game treated its all-male lead characters in a similar vein through their stereotyped tendencies towards violence.[124] After GameSpot's Carolyn Petit claimed the game was misogynistic, her review was met with backlash as users responded with 20,000 largely negative comments on the webpage and a Change.org petition for her firing.[203] Many journalists defended her right to an opinion and lamented the gaming community's defensiveness towards criticism.[204][205]

Australian department stores Target and Kmart pulled the game from their stores in December 2014 after a Change.org petition against depictions of violence towards women in the game amassed over 40,000 signatures.[206][207] Take-Two Interactive chief operating officer Strauss Zelnick publicly expressed the company's disappointment that the game had been pulled from the retailers, and affirmed that he "stand[s] behind our products, the people who create them, and the consumers who play them".[206] IGN called the Change.org petition "misinformed", stating that its complaints about incentives for committing sexual violence in the game are untrue. Sexual violence in games is forbidden by the Australian Classification Board, meaning the game would have been refused classification.[208] Kotaku said that the depiction of women is inherently problematic, and that Target were within their rights to refuse to stock the game and were obligated to respond to the petition's wide support.[209]

Petit (writing for Kotaku) and online anti-harassment activist Ben Colliver criticised the game's depiction of transgender characters as sex workers with primarily muscular bodies, describing it as harmful transphobic stereotypes;[210][211] Colliver wrote that the representation "does not reflect the complex, nuanced structures that often regulate transgender people's lives".[210] The April 2022 re-release on PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S removed the content from all portions of the game except Director Mode, meaning their models are accessible but without dialogue options. Some journalists recognised the removal may have been prompted by an open letter written by LGBTQ+ advocacy group Out Making Games, who requested the removal after reading Petit's article. The group praised Rockstar's decision to remove the content.[212][213][214]

In October 2013, rapper Daz Dillinger issued a cease and desist letter to Rockstar Games and Take Two Interactive for allegedly using two of his songs without authorisation.[215][o] In February 2014, television personality Karen Gravano of the reality television programme Mob Wives filed suit against Rockstar Games in allegation that a character in the game is based on her likeness and story and was depicted without her consent.[216][p] Rockstar filed to dismiss Gravano's lawsuit in April, and stated that the allegations are foreclosed by the First Amendment.[217] In July, actress Lindsay Lohan filed a lawsuit, claiming elements in the game, including the Lacey Jonas character, were influenced by her image, voice and clothing line without permission.[218] Rockstar responded in court papers that sought a dismissal of the case, saying that the case was frivolous and filed for publicity purposes.[219] In 2016, both lawsuits were dismissed.[220]

Sales
Within 24 hours of its release, Grand Theft Auto V generated more than US$815 million in worldwide revenue, equating to approximately 11.21 million copies sold for Take-Two Interactive.[221][q] The numbers nearly doubled analysts' expectations for the title.[223][224] Three days after its release, the game had surpassed one billion dollars in sales, making it the fastest-selling entertainment product in history.[225][r] Six weeks after its release, Rockstar had shipped nearly 29 million copies of the game to retailers, exceeding the lifetime figures of Grand Theft Auto IV.[227] On 7 October 2013, the game became the best-selling digital release on PlayStation Store for PlayStation 3, breaking the previous record set by The Last of Us, though numerical sales figures were not disclosed.[228][229] It broke seven Guinness World Records on 8 October: best-selling video game in 24 hours, best-selling action-adventure video game in 24 hours, highest-grossing video game in 24 hours, fastest entertainment property to gross US$1 billion, fastest video game to gross US$1 billion, highest revenue generated by an entertainment product in 24 hours, and most viewed trailer for an action-adventure video game.[2]

A digital version was released on 18 October for the Xbox 360,[230] which went on to become the highest-grossing day-one and week-one release on Xbox Live.[231] By May 2014, the game had generated nearly US$1.98 billion in revenue.[232] As of August 2014, the game had sold-in over 34 million units to retailers for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.[233] By December 2014, the game had shipped 45 million copies, including 10 million copies of the re-released version.[234] By April 2018, MarketWatch reported the game had generated about $6 billion and was the most profitable entertainment product of all time;[235][236] it had nearly sold around 100 million copies by July 2018,[237] and by July 2021, it had shipped over 150 million copies.[238] More copies were sold in 2020 than any other year since the game's launch in 2013.[239] By late 2023, Barron's reported the game's lifetime revenue figures had increased to $8.5 billion, consistently generating over $500 million annually with about 22 million monthly active players;[240] by December 2024, the game had shipped 210 million copies worldwide across all platforms.[241]

In the United Kingdom, the game became the all-time fastest-selling game, selling more than 2.25 million copies in five days. This broke the record set by Call of Duty: Black Ops at two million copies over the same period. It broke the day one record by selling 1.57 million copies and generating £65 million.[242] In two weeks, the game sold more than 2.6 million copies and generated £90 million, which accounted for 52% of games sold in September 2013.[243] After three weeks on sale, it beat Grand Theft Auto IV's lifetime sales in the United Kingdom.[244] In its fourth week, it became the fastest-selling title to break the three million barrier in the UK, thus overtaking Black Ops II's lifetime sales.[245] In November 2014, the game became the best-selling game of all time in the UK, overtaking Black Ops.[246] The game was similarly successful in North America: it was the best selling game in September, representing over 50% of software sales[247] and boosting overall software sales by 52% compared to September 2012.[248]

Legacy
Critics agreed that Grand Theft Auto V was among seventh-generation console gaming's best[27] and a great closing title before the eighth generation's emergence.[249][250] Polygon observed that the game would "bridge between games' present and the future", and declared it "the closure of this generation, and the benchmark for the next".[120] VideoGamer.com considered it "the ultimate swansong for this console cycle" that would "cast a long shadow over the next".[251] Three days after its release, the game ranked second on IGN''s "Top 25 Xbox 360 Games" list. They considered that the open world's scale and detail succeeded the majority of other Xbox 360 games. They called the game "a triumph both for gamers and for the medium itself, and it deserves its runaway success".[252] In November 2013, Hardcore Gamer placed the game third on their "Top 100 Games of the Generation" list. They cited its improved shooting and driving mechanics over its predecessors, and considered the multiple protagonist design "a welcome change of pace" that could become an eighth-generation gaming benchmark.[253] In December, The Daily Telegraph listed the game among their "50 best games of the console generation". They called it a "cultural behemoth" that "will be Rockstar's lasting legacy".[254]

In January 2014, Computer and Video Games ranked the game fourth on their "Games of the Generation" list. They said that for the first time, Rockstar created an "utterly beautiful" open world. They found that the game did away with Grand Theft Auto IV's repetitive mission design and focused instead on fun gameplay.[255] In May, IGN ranked it eighth on their "Top 100 Games of a Generation" list and called it a "huge, raucous, and wildly ambitious bridge towards the [eighth] generation of console gaming".[256] The next month, it placed third on IGN's "Games of a Generation: Your Top 100" list as voted by the site's readers.[257] In August, Game Informer ranked it third on their "Top 10 Action Games Of The Generation" list. They compared the game's quality to that of its predecessor but thought that its ensemble character set-up, varied missions and multiplayer superseded Grand Theft Auto IV's placement on the list. They wrote of the story's absurd drama and the open world's vastness, and did not "regret a single second" spent playing the game.[258] In November, Edge named it the fifth-best game of its generation and commented that "no other game studio is even daring to attempt an open world game in its tradition because there is simply no possibility of measuring up to [its] standards."[259] In 2015, the publication rated it the second-greatest video game of all time.[260] The game ranked high on several best game lists determined by the public; it featured eighth on Empire's "100 Greatest Video Games Of All Time" list, and fifth on Good Game's "Top 100 Games" list, as voted by the magazine and programme's respective audiences.[261][262] It was the most tweeted game of 2015, despite being released over a year earlier.[263]

Development of Grand Theft Auto VI was confirmed by Rockstar in February 2022;[264] the game was formally revealed in December 2023 and is currently scheduled to be released in 2025.[265]

Use in research
The game was used in a study by Intel Labs where they presented an approach for enhancing its graphics using neural networks.[266][267]


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Grand Theft Auto VI

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Grand Theft Auto VI
Art of a man and woman sitting on the hood of a car
Artwork depicting Lucia and her partner
Publisher(s)	Rockstar Games
Series	Grand Theft Auto
Platform(s)	
PlayStation 5
Xbox Series X/S
Release	Q3/Q4 2025
Grand Theft Auto VI is an upcoming video game in development by Rockstar Games. It is due to be the eighth main Grand Theft Auto game, following Grand Theft Auto V (2013), and the sixteenth entry overall. Set within an open world—the fictional U.S. state of Leonida, based on Florida—and its Miami-inspired Vice City, the story is expected to follow the criminal duo of Lucia and her male partner.[a]

Following years of speculation and anticipation, Rockstar confirmed in February 2022 that the game was in development. That September, footage from unfinished versions was leaked on the internet in what journalists described as one of the biggest leaks in the history of the video game industry. The game was formally revealed in December 2023 and is scheduled to be released in late 2025 for the PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S.

Setting and characters
Grand Theft Auto VI is set in the fictional open world U.S. state of Leonida—based on Florida—which includes Vice City, a fictionalised version of Miami.[1][2][3] Vice City was previously featured in Grand Theft Auto (1997) and as the main setting of Grand Theft Auto: Vice City (2002) and Grand Theft Auto: Vice City Stories (2006).[4][5][6] The game world parodies contemporary American culture, with satirical depictions of social media and influencer culture, and references to Internet memes such as Florida Man.[7][8][9] The story follows a criminal duo: Lucia, the series's first female protagonist since 2000,[b] and her male partner;[a] the first trailer depicts Lucia as a prison inmate, and later evading custody with her partner.[2][16]

Development and release
Rockstar Games began preliminary work on Grand Theft Auto VI in 2014 after Grand Theft Auto V's release, and principal development started after Red Dead Redemption 2's release in 2018.[17][18] During its production, the game was code-named Project Americas.[18] Jason Schreier reported the game was "a moderately sized release" that would expand over time to avoid its predecessors' developer crunch,[19] and that it would feature two Bonnie and Clyde–inspired protagonists, including a Latina woman,[18] and "a significant online mode" akin to Grand Theft Auto Online.[17] He claimed the developers were cautiously subverting the series's trend of joking about marginalised groups.[18][20] In 2018, The Know reported that the game would be set primarily in Vice City and partly in South America,[21] and in 2021, Tom Henderson claimed its map could evolve akin to Fortnite.[22][23]

The game became highly anticipated in the years before its announcement,[24][25][26] and journalists noted some fans became frustrated by Rockstar's continued silence, particularly after they announced a re-release of Grand Theft Auto V in 2020.[27][28][29] An individual referencing the game received media attention for interrupting several live stage and television shows.[30][31][32] On 4 February 2022, Rockstar confirmed development was "well underway".[33] In July, Rockstar announced Red Dead Online would not receive more major updates as development resources were withdrawn to focus on the upcoming game;[34] industry sources stated Rockstar reallocated resources after planned remasters of Grand Theft Auto IV (2008) and Red Dead Redemption (2010) were paused due to the backlash received by Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy – The Definitive Edition (2021).[35]

Schreier reported in February 2024 that Rockstar requested employees cease remote work and return to offices full time from April "for productivity and security" as development entered its "final stages".[36][37][38] The Independent Workers' Union of Great Britain criticised Rockstar for contradicting their promise to maintain flexible working conditions; some employees were concerned it could negatively impact staff health and morale and prompt resignations and crunch conditions.[38][39] In March, Kotaku's Zack Zwiezen reported the decision was partly to avoid a delay from the internally scheduled early 2025 release window; development "falling behind" meant late 2025 seemed more practical, with a potential delay to 2026 as a "fallback plan".[40][41] Rockstar's parent company Take-Two Interactive's share price dropped by more than five per cent,[42] though other journalists refuted the report and said the game remained "on schedule".[43][44] In May, Take-Two confirmed the game was scheduled for the third or fourth quarter of 2025.[45]

Anticipation surrounding the game spawned an internet meme indicating bemusement that other surprising events occurred "before GTA 6 ".[46][47][48] It won Most Wanted Game at the Golden Joystick Awards and Most Anticipated Game at the Game Awards in 2024.[49][50] Several publishers are awaiting a release date announcement before scheduling their own games, with others prepared to reschedule to avoid potential competition with Grand Theft Auto VI.[17][51][52] Some are hoping it is sold for US$80 to $100—more than the standard $70—as it would prompt industry-wide changes, but analysts consider it unlikely.[53][54][55] The research firm Circana predicted the launches of Grand Theft Auto VI and the Nintendo Switch 2 could allow the video game market to "rebound" with record consumer spending in 2025;[56][57] DFC Intelligence projected sales of 40 million and earnings of $3.2 billion in the first year—twice as much as Grand Theft Auto V —including $1 billion in preorders.[58][59]

Promotion
In November 2023, Sam Houser, the president of Rockstar Games, announced the first trailer would release in early December to celebrate the company's 25th anniversary.[60][61] Within five hours, the announcement on X (formerly Twitter) surpassed two previous posts about the game to become the platform's most-liked gaming-related post,[62][63][64] later surpassed by Rockstar's post announcing the trailer's 5 December release date, with 1.8 million likes in 24 hours.[65] Other developers imitated the announcement's formatting to promote their trailers.[66][67][15] On 4 December, a low-quality version of the trailer was leaked on X; in response, Rockstar published the official version on YouTube, revealing the title, protagonists, setting, and release window of 2025 for the PlayStation 5 and the Xbox Series X and Series S.[68][69][70]

The trailer broke the record for most first-day views on a non-music YouTube video within 12 hours, with 46 million,[71][72] and, within 24 hours, became the third-most-viewed overall, with 93 million,[73][74][75] and most-liked game trailer, with 8.9 million.[76][77] It surpassed the lifetime viewership of Grand Theft Auto V's 2011 reveal trailer within two days, with 101 million views,[78] and became the second-most-viewed game trailer by January, with 168 million.[79] Its featured song, Tom Petty's "Love Is a Long Road", saw a near-37,000 per cent increase in Spotify streams, had almost 250,000 searches on Shazam, and ranked second on the worldwide iTunes chart.[80] The trailer spawned fan-created recreations in other video games, as a brickfilm, and in live-action by the Hyundai World Rally Team.[81][82][83]

Leaks
On 18 September 2022, a user known as "teapotuberhacker"[c] published 90 videos to the website GTAForums showing 50 minutes of work-in-progress game footage.[86] Schreier confirmed with sources at Rockstar that the footage was genuine,[87] and The Guardian reported it was from several stages of development,[86] with some videos about a year old.[4] The footage revealed a modern-day Vice City setting, contained animation and gameplay tests, level layouts, and character conversations, and depicted the player characters, Lucia and Jason, entering a strip club and robbing a diner.[4][14] The hacker claimed to be responsible for the Uber security breach from the prior week,[87][88] said they had downloaded the files directly from Rockstar's internal Slack groups,[89] and claimed to possess source code, assets, and internal builds of Grand Theft Auto V and VI, which they threatened to publish.[87]

Take-Two responded by submitting takedowns of videos showing or discussing the leaks hosted on YouTube,[86][90] and contacted GTAForums and Reddit moderators to remove access.[91] The hacker wrote they were "looking to negotiate a deal" with Rockstar or Take-Two.[92] Journalists described the event as one of the biggest leaks in video game history;[93][94][95] Schreier called it "a nightmare for Rockstar Games" which could limit employees' remote-work flexibility.[96][97] The Jefferies Group analyst Andrew Uerkwitz called it a "PR disaster" that could potentially delay the game and diminish staff morale, but was unlikely to impact reception or sales.[98][99] The Guardian noted the leaked footage was being widely criticised "by ill-informed users" due to its quality, despite not being representative of the final product.[86] Some users erroneously claimed graphics and art assets are finalised early in game development. In solidarity, several developers shared work-in-progress footage of their games[100][101][102] and some, including Cliff Bleszinski, Neil Druckmann, Rami Ismail, and Alanah Pearce, offered sympathies to Rockstar.[4][86][103]

On 19 September, Rockstar confirmed the leak to be a "network intrusion" and lamented the manner in which the game was first demonstrated, but did not anticipate long-term effects on development.[104] They disabled comments and replies on their social media accounts in the days following the leak.[85] Take-Two added that steps had been taken "to isolate and contain this incident".[98] Take-Two's share price dropped by more than six per cent in pre-market trading that day,[98][99] but recovered during regular trading hours following their statement.[105] Uber acknowledged the potential links to their security breach and noted they were working with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the United States Department of Justice. They believed the hacker was affiliated with the group Lapsus$, which was thought to have breached companies such as Microsoft, Nvidia, and Samsung over the preceding year.[106][107] Strauss Zelnick, Take-Two's chairman and chief executive officer, said the incident caused the companies to become more vigilant with cybersecurity and had impacted staff emotionally but business remained unaffected.[108][109] Rockstar later claimed the incident cost the company $5 million and thousands of staff hours to recover.[110]

A 17-year-old boy from Oxfordshire—identified as "teapotuberhacker" and a key member of Lapsus$—was arrested by the City of London Police on 22 September as part of an investigation supported by the National Cyber Crime Unit and American federal law enforcement.[111][112][113] While on bail for hacking EE and Nvidia and under police protection at a Travelodge hotel, he breached Rockstar using a mobile phone, television, and an Amazon Fire TV Stick and threatened to release the source code in a Slack message to all Rockstar staff.[110][113][114] Appearing before Highbury Corner Youth Court, he pleaded guilty to two counts of breaching bail conditions and not guilty to two counts of computer misuse.[115][116][117] The case was referred to a higher court while the boy was remanded to a youth detention centre.[117][118] In mid-2023, he stood trial at Southwark Crown Court for twelve offences, including six counts of computer misuse, three of blackmail, and two of fraud.[113][119] He was deemed unfit to stand trial due to his autism;[110][114] instead of assessing his guilt, a jury determined he had committed the acts.[113][120] A judge placed him under an indefinite hospital order in December for being a high public risk as he expressed an intent to continue committing cybercrimes.[110][114]

On 1 January 2025, a Reddit user posted a photograph and two videos of a PlayStation 5 development kit running the game, taken by a person who "worked at the Rockstar office for a few months" in mid-2021; the post was later deleted. Based on the office's surroundings, Eurogamer determined the photograph and videos were taken at Rockstar San Diego.[121][122][123] Polygon's Ian Walker found no new information was revealed from the post, which he called the "worst leak of all time".[122]


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GTA Vice city missions:

This is a list of missions in Grand Theft Auto: Vice City. There are 38 story missions, 19 asset missions, 6 racing missions, 5 phone missions, 3 stadium missions, 4 off-road missions, 3 remote-controlled missions, 1 sparrow mission, and 7 side missions for a total of 86 missions.


Contents
1	Story Missions
1.1	Introduction
1.2	Sonny Forelli
1.3	Ken Rosenberg (Lawyer)
1.4	Avery Carrington
1.5	Juan Cortez
1.6	Ricardo Diaz
1.7	Avery Carrington
1.8	Juan Cortez
1.9	Kent Paul
1.10	Lance Vance
1.11	Juan Cortez
1.12	Vercetti Estate
1.13	Umberto Robina
1.14	Auntie Poulet
1.15	Umberto Robina
1.16	Love Fist
1.17	Mitch Baker
1.18	Love Fist
1.19	Print Works
1.20	Tommy Vercetti
2	Asset Missions
2.1	Boatyard
2.2	Cherry Popper Ice Cream Factory
2.3	The Pole Position Club
2.4	Sunshine Autos
2.5	InterGlobal Film Studio
2.6	Kaufman Cabs
2.7	Print Works
2.8	Malibu Club
2.9	Phil Cassidy
3	Vice Street Racer
4	Pay Phone Missions
4.1	Mr. Black
5	Hyman Memorial Stadium Missions
6	Sparrow Missions
7	Off-Road Missions
8	Remote Controlled Vehicle Missions
9	Other Missions
10	See Also
11	Navigation


Story Missions
 Introduction
Title	Description	Rewards

In The Beginning...	After escaping an ambushed drug deal with Vance brothers, drive to the Ocean View Hotel.	Ocean View Hotel Safehouse
 Sonny Forelli
Title	Description	Rewards

An Old Friend	Call Sonny Forelli.	N/A
 Ken Rosenberg (Lawyer)
Title	Description	Rewards

The Party	Meet Juan Cortez at a party on his yacht, where you are introduced to Ricardo Diaz, and then take Mercedes Cortez over to The Pole Position Club.	$100
Soiree Outfit

Back Alley Brawl	Kill Leo Teal and then visit Ammu-Nation with Lance Vance.	$200
Pistol

Jury Fury	Intimidate two jury members in Giorgio Forelli's fraud trial.	$400

Riot	Cause a riot to bankrupt a delivery company.	$1000
Coveralls Outfit
Baseball Bat available in Bunch of Tools


 Avery Carrington
Title	Description	Rewards

Four Iron	Kill Avery's business rival at the Leaf Links country club.	$500
Leaf Links Country Club
Country Club Outfit

Demolition Man	Blow up a building using an RC helicopter.	$1000
 Juan Cortez
Title	Description	Rewards

Treacherous Swine	Chase Gonzales out of his penthouse in Vice Point and kill him for leaking information.	$250
Chainsaw
Casual Outfit

Mall Shootout	Meet up with Pierre La Ponce at the North Point Mall, escape French military intelligence operatives, and chase and kill Pierre, retrieving some stolen military technology.	$500

Guardian Angels	After collecting some special firepower from the multi-storey car park in Washington Beach and meeting Lance Vance, protect Ricardo Diaz from the Haitians in a drug deal with the Cubans and collect his money.	$1000
Access to Starfish Island
Ability to gain five-star wanted level
 Ricardo Diaz
Title	Description	Rewards

The Chase	Chase one of Diaz's dealers, who has been skimming from him, to his hideout on Prawn Island.	$1000

Phnom Penh '86	Kill the dealer and his associates while flying in a helicopter, and then retrieve the stolen money from the mansion on Prawn Island.	$2000

The Fastest Boat	Steal a speedboat from the boatyard.	$4000

Supply & Demand	Complete a drug deal before other prospective buyers can purchase the goods, and then take out all of the gunmen in a speedboat chase.	$10000
Black Tracksuit appears outside Jocksport in Downtown.


 Avery Carrington
Title	Description	Rewards

Two Bit Hit	Disguise as a Cuban gang member and ambush the funeral of a Haitian gang lieutenant, killing his successor to start a gang war between the Cubans and the Haitians.	$2500
Havana Outfit
 Juan Cortez
Title	Description	Rewards

Sir, Yes Sir!	Hijack an army tank and deliver it to a lockup before the tank explodes.	$2000
 Kent Paul
Title	Description	Rewards

Death Row	Save Lance Vance from Ricardo Diaz's men at the junkyard, and then take him to the hospital before he bleeds out.	N/A
 Lance Vance
Title	Description	Rewards

Rub Out	Infiltrate Diaz's mansion with Lance and kill Ricardo Diaz.	$50,000
Vercetti Estate
Ability to gain six-star wanted level
More weapons available at Downtown Ammu-Nation
 Juan Cortez
Title	Location	Description	Rewards

All Hands On Deck!	Cortez's Yacht, Ocean Bay Marina, Vice City Beach	Help Juan Cortez escape French military intelligence on his yacht.	$5000
Speeder


 Vercetti Estate
Title	Description	Rewards

Shakedown	Intimidate shop owners at the North Point Mall into paying protection money.	$2000
.308 Sniper available at Ammu-Nation
Assets available to purchase

Bar Brawl	Drive DBP Security out of Ocean Beach.	$4,000
SPAS 12 available at Ammu-Nation

Cop Land	Blow up a store in the mall while posing as a cop.	$10000
Vercetti Estate generating up to $5000 a day
 Umberto Robina
Title	Description	Rewards

Stunt Boat Challenge	Complete a boat race.	$1000

Cannon Fodder	Ambush a drug deal between the Sharks and the Haitians.	$2000

Naval Engagement	Steal a drug shipment.	$4000


 Auntie Poulet
Title	Description	Rewards

Juju Scramble	Collect several packages full of "juju" scattered around Little Haiti.	$1000

Bombs Away!	Drop bombs on Cuban drug dealers using RC planes.	$2000

Dirty Lickin's	Snipe dead some Cuban gang members before they beat the Haitians in a street fight.	$5000
 Umberto Robina
Title	Location	Description	Rewards

Trojan Voodoo	Café Robina, Little Havana	Infiltrate and blow up a Haitian drug factory.	$10000
 Love Fist
Title	Description	Rewards

Love Juice	Buy drugs for the band and bring Mercedes Cortez to Love Fist's studio.	$2000

Psycho Killer	Kill an obsessed stalker.	$4000


 Mitch Baker
Title	Description	Rewards

Alloy Wheels of Steel	Win a bike race around Downtown.	$1000

Messing with the Man	Cause havoc on the streets to prove yourself to Mitch.	$2000

Hog Tied	Retrieve Mitch's stolen Angel from the Sharks.	$4000
 Love Fist
Title	Description	Rewards

Publicity Tour	Drive around in the band's limo while Love Fist defuses a bomb planted by the obsessed stalker.	$8,000
Love Fist Limo spawn point (subsequent versions only except PlayStation 4)
 Print Works
Title	Description	Rewards

Cap the Collector	Kill the collectors taxing your businesses.	$30000
 Tommy Vercetti
Title	Description	Rewards

Keep Your Friends Close...	Kill Lance Vance and Sonny Forelli.	$30000
Hunter spawns in Fort Baxter Air Base


Asset Missions
Note: In order to unlock the final missions in the story line, it is necessary to buy at least six asset properties, one of which must be the Print Works, and complete their respective missions. Phil Cassidy's place does not count towards this six. Once this is accomplished, assuming Cop Land has also been completed, the penultimate mission Cap the Collector is unlocked.

 Boatyard
Title	Description	Rewards

Checkpoint Charlie	Recover drug packages scattered across the ocean.	$5000
$50000 if all races are completed
Asset generates up to $2000 a day
 Cherry Popper Ice Cream Factory
Title	Description	Rewards

Distribution	Sell drugs to the people of Vice City from the cover of an ice cream van. After selling to 50 customers, the mission is completed.	Asset generates up to $3000 a day
 The Pole Position Club
Enjoy a private dance in the back room. After spending $ 300, the mission is completed.
 Sunshine Autos
Title	Description	Rewards

Sunshine Autos Import Garage	Steal cars to complete the lists.	
Deluxo, Sabre Turbo, Sandking, Hotring Racer will be parked in the dealership.
Sunshine Autos will generate up to $9,000.
 InterGlobal Film Studio
Title	Description	Rewards

Recruitment Drive	Recruit Candy Suxxx and Mercedes Cortez for the production of a pornographic film.	$1000

Dildo Dodo	Drop fliers advertising the film a Skimmer seaplane.	$2000
Skimmer

Martha's Mug Shot	Acquire incriminating pictures of Alex Shrub.	$4000

G-Spotlight	Arrange a huge publicity stunt involving a rooftop spotlight.	$8000
Film Asset generates up to $7000 a day


 Kaufman Cabs
Title	Description	Rewards

V.I.P.	Deliver a fare to the airport.	$1000

Friendly Rivalry	Destroy three cabs from a rival company.	$2000

Cabmaggedon	Survive the rival cab company's retaliation and take out their leader.	$5000
Zebra Cab
 Print Works
Title	Description	Rewards

Spilling the Beans	Raid a ship in the docks and extract information on counterfeit plates from the head of the Vice City Triads.	$2000

Hit the Courier	Kill the courier and steal the counterfeit plates.	$5000
Asset generates up to $8000 daily
 Malibu Club
Title	Description	Rewards

No Escape?	Break Cam Jones out of jail.	$1000

The Shootist	Beat Phil Cassidy in a shooting contest.	$2000
Shooting Range

The Driver	Beat Hilary King in a street race.	$3000

The Job	Rob El Banco Corrupto Grande bank.	$50,000
Bank Job Outfit


 Phil Cassidy
Title	Description	Rewards

Gun Runner	Kill the gun runner Pedro Garcia and collect weapons for Phil.	$2000 + $100 for every of Garcia's men killed

Boomshine Saigon	Rush Phil Cassidy to a surgeon.	$4000
Weapons purchasable from Phil's Place
Vice Street Racer
The player's entrance fee represents a wager in the purse against three NPC drivers - win to quadruple your investment.

Terminal Velocity: Race around Escobar International Airport to win $ 400 for each $ 100 entry.
Ocean Drive: Race around Ocean Beach to win $ 2,000 for each $ 500 entry.
Border Run: Race around Little Haiti and Little Havana to win $ 4,000 for each $ 1,000 entry.
Capital Cruise: Race around Ocean Beach, Washington Beach and Vice Point to win $ 8,000 for each $ 2,000 entry.
Tour!: Race around Washington Beach and Vice Point to win $ 20,000 for each $ 5,000 entry.
V.C. Endurance: Race around all of Vice City to win $ 40,000 for each $ 10,000 entry.
Pay Phone Missions
 Mr. Black
Title	Description	Rewards

Road Kill	Assassinate Carl Pearson.	$500

Waste the Wife	Assassinate Mrs. Dawson.	$2000

Autocide	Assassinate Mike Griffin, Dick Tanner, Franco Carter, Marcus Hammond, Nick Kong and Charlie Dilson.	$4000

Check Out at the Check In	Assassinate a businessman at the airport and deliver a briefcase he's carrying to the Downtown Ammu-Nation.	$8000

Loose Ends	Sabotage a deal between the Sharks and the FBI.	$16000


Hyman Memorial Stadium Missions
Hotring: Win a stock car race.
Bloodring: Win a demolition derby.
Dirtring: Complete a bike obstacle course.
Sparrow Missions
Complete all four Chopper Checkpoints.
Off-Road Missions
PCJ Playground: Collect 24 checkpoints in the alleyways of Ocean Beach using a PCJ-600.
Cone Crazy: Collect five checkpoints on the top of a multi-storey car park in Washington Beach without hitting any traffic cones.
Trial by Dirt: Collect checkpoints around the dirt track in Downtown using a Sanchez.
Test Track: Collect checkpoints around the dirt track in Downtown using a Landstalker.
Remote Controlled Vehicle Missions
RC Bandit Race: Win an RC car race.
RC Baron Race: Win an RC plane race.
RC Raider Pickup: Recover checkpoints with an RC helicopter.
Other Missions
Paramedic Complete Level 12 to achieve infinite sprint. Required for 100%.
Shooting Range: Get a score of at least 45 points in the Ammu-Nation shooting range challenge. Required for 100%.
Firefighter Complete level 12 to achieve fire-proof. Required for 100%.
Pizza Boy Complete Level 10 to increase maximum health to 150. Required for 100%.
Robberies: Hold up 15 storekeepers for cash in register. Required for 100%.
Taxi Driver Complete 100 fares to achieve hydraulic jump capability when horn is blown. Required for 100%.
Vigilante Complete Level 12 to increase maximum armor to 150. Required for 100%.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
GTA 3 Missions list and description

There are 67 missions in total in the storyline of Grand Theft Auto III, with 50 main missions plus 17 optional Pay Phone Missions which are not required for story progression. However, the Phone missions are still necessary for 100% completion of the game.

The GTA 3 missions below are listed in chronological order, grouped by the Location/Area they take place in, and the walkthrough also applies to the GTA III Definitive Edition.

Clicking on a GTA 3 mission brings you to its full details, with Mission Objectives, Video Walkthrough, and more information.

GTA 3: All Missions Index
Warning: Missable Missions in GTA 3
Portland Missions
Staunton Island Missions
Shoreside Vale Missions
Pay Phone Missions (Optional)
Portland (El Burro & Marty Chonks)
Staunton Island (King Courtney)
Shoreside Vale (D-Ice)
How many missions are in GTA 3?
GTA III Side Missions
Warning: Missable Missions in GTA 3
Generally, since some missions from different contacts become available at the same time, they can be played in a slightly different order.

However, GTA III has 10 missable missions that will become permanently inaccessible if you play them in the wrong order. If you miss these missions, you can still progress through the story, but you will be locked out of achieving 100% completion on the current save file.

If you want to achieve 100% completion and make sure you don't miss any of these missions, you must:

Complete all the Joey's and Luigi's missions before playing "Last Requests" for Salvatore
Complete all the Kenji Kasen missions before playing "Waka-Gashira Wipeout!" for Donald Love
Complete "Two-Faced Tanner" before playing "Grand Theft Aero" for Donald Love
We listed the GTA 3 missions in the correct order below and marked the MISSABLE missions. It is strongly advised to make multiple save files that you can go back to in case you made a mistake and accidentally skipped a mission.

Portland Missions
Below you find the list of GTA 3 Missions taking place on the island of Portland. There are 22 main missions in this section before Staunton Island is unlocked. There are also 8 Pay Phone missions in Portland.

GTA 3 Mission - Give Me Liberty
 1. Give Me Liberty
Map Blip Icon 8-Ball
Claude is betrayed by his partner Catalina, leading to incarceration and a prison break. Now isolated on Portland Island, Claude and 8-Ball consider their next steps.
Rewards: Portland Safehouse
GTA 3 Mission - Luigi's Girls
 2. Luigi's Girls
Map Blip Icon Luigi Goterelli
Luigi asks Claude to pick up one of his girls, Misty, from the clinic.
Rewards: $1,500
GTA 3 Mission - Don't Spank Ma Bitch Up
 3. Don't Spank Ma Bitch Up
Map Blip Icon Luigi Goterelli
Claude kills a local drug dealer to obtain his car for Luigi.
Rewards: $4,000
GTA 3 Mission - Drive Misty For Me
 4. Drive Misty For Me
Map Blip Icon Luigi Goterelli
Misty needs picking up and taking to Joey Leone.
Rewards: $1,000
GTA 3 Mission - Pump-Action Pimp
 5. Pump-Action Pimp
Map Blip Icon Luigi Goterelli MISSABLE
Claude needs to 'take out' a couple of pimps.
Rewards: $4,000; Ammu-nation
GTA 3 Mission - The Fuzz Ball
 6. The Fuzz Ball
Map Blip Icon Luigi Goterelli MISSABLE
Claude delivers prostitutes to a police ball.
Rewards: Between $2,000 - $4,000
GTA 3 Mission - Mike Lips Last Lunch
 7. Mike Lips Last Lunch
Map Blip Icon Joey Leone
Joey is owed money by the Forelli brothers. He wants Claude to help him with some payback.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Mission - Farewell 'Chunky' Lee Chong
 8. Farewell 'Chunky' Lee Chong
Map Blip Icon Joey Leone
Claude is instructed by Joey to kill Lee Chong.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Mission - Van Heist
 9. Van Heist
Map Blip Icon Joey Leone
Joey wants Claude to steal a Securicar van.
Rewards: $20,000
GTA 3 Mission - Cipriani's Chauffeur
 10. Cipriani's Chauffeur
Map Blip Icon Joey Leone
Claude chauffeurs Toni around Liberty City.
Rewards: $3,000
GTA 3 Mission - Dead Skunk in the Trunk
 11. Dead Skunk in the Trunk
Map Blip Icon Joey Leone MISSABLE
A body of one of the Forelli Brothers needs disposing of.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Mission - The Getaway
 12. The Getaway
Map Blip Icon Joey Leone MISSABLE
Joey has one last job for Claude.
Rewards: Between $10,000 - $30,000
GTA 3 Mission - Taking Out The Laundry
 13. Taking Out The Laundry
Map Blip Icon Toni Cipriani
Claude is tasked with destorying a handful of vans.
Rewards: $20,000
GTA 3 Mission - The Pick-Up
 14. The Pick-Up
Map Blip Icon Toni Cipriani
While collecting a 'payment', Claude has to deal with some Triads.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Mission - Salvatore's Called A Meeting
 15. Salvatore's Called A Meeting
Map Blip Icon Toni Cipriani
Claude's on chauffeur duty for Toni.
Rewards: $15,000
GTA 3 Mission - Chaperone
 16. Chaperone
Map Blip Icon Salvatore Leone
It's another chauffeur job for Claude. This time, he has to look after Maria.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Mission - Triads and Tribulations
 17. Triads and Tribulations
Map Blip Icon Toni Cipriani
Some Triads need dealing with.
Rewards: $30,000
GTA 3 Mission - Blow Fish
 18. Blow Fish
Map Blip Icon Toni Cipriani
Toni wants the Triads dealt with once and for all.
Rewards: $30,000
GTA 3 Mission - Cutting The Grass
 19. Cutting The Grass
Map Blip Icon Salvatore Leone
There's a rat in the Leone Family and Claude needs to sniff him out.
Rewards: $15,000
GTA 3 Mission - Bomb Da Base: Act I
 20. Bomb Da Base: Act I
Map Blip Icon Salvatore Leone
Salvatore wants Claude to destory the freighter being used to make SPANK.
Rewards: -
GTA 3 Mission - Bomb Da Base: Act II
 21. Bomb Da Base: Act II
Map Blip Icon 8-Ball
Claude meets with 8-Ball to carry out the attack on the SPANK freighter.
Rewards: $150,000
GTA 3 Mission - Last Requests
 22. Last Requests
Map Blip Icon Salvatore Leone
Salvatore has one last job for Claude.
Rewards: $20,000; Access to Staunton Island; Staunton Island Safehouse
Staunton Island Missions
Below you find the list of GTA 3 Missions taking place on Staunton Island. There are 27 main missions plus 4 Pay Phone missions in Staunton Island.

Access to the third island, Shoreside Vale, is unlocked after completing A Drop In The Ocean.

GTA 3 Mission - Sayonara Salvatore
 23. Sayonara Salvatore
Map Blip Icon Asuka Kasen
Claude wants to make an alliance with the Yakuza.
Rewards: $25,000
GTA 3 Mission - Under Surveillance
 24. Under Surveillance
Map Blip Icon Asuka Kasen
Asuka needs some FBI dealing with.
Rewards: $15,000
GTA 3 Mission - Paparazzi Purge
 25. Paparazzi Purge
Map Blip Icon Asuka Kasen
Paparazzi have been snooping around in the Yakuza's business.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Mission - Payday For Ray
 26. Payday For Ray
Map Blip Icon Asuka Kasen
Asuka needs a payment delivered.
Rewards: $11,000
GTA 3 Mission - Two-Faced Tanner
 27. Two-Faced Tanner
Map Blip Icon Asuka Kasen MISSABLE
Tanner needs taking out.
Rewards: $20,000
GTA 3 Mission - Kanbu Bust-out
 28. Kanbu Bust-out
Map Blip Icon Kenji Kasen MISSABLE
Claude busts Kanbu out of jail.
Rewards: $30,000
GTA 3 Mission - Grand Theft Auto
 29. Grand Theft Auto
Map Blip Icon Kenji Kasen MISSABLE
Claude steals some sports cars for Kenji.
Rewards: $25,000
GTA 3 Mission - Deal Steal
 30. Deal Steal
Map Blip Icon Kenji Kasen MISSABLE
Kenji sends Claude to infiltrate a meeting between the Colombian Cartel and the Yardies.
Rewards: $25,000
GTA 3 Mission - Shima
 31. Shima
Map Blip Icon Kenji Kasen MISSABLE
Money needs collecting but the Diablos aren't making it easy.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Mission - Smack Down
 32. Smack Down
Map Blip Icon Kenji Kasen MISSABLE
Yardie drug dealers need taking out.
Rewards: $10,000 plus $1,000 for each Yardie killed
GTA 3 Mission - Silence The Sneak
 33. Silence The Sneak
Map Blip Icon Ray Machowski
Ray's former partner is snitching on him. Ray needs Claude to deal with it.
Rewards: $30,000
GTA 3 Mission - Arms Shortage
 34. Arms Shortage
Map Blip Icon Ray Machowski
Defend Phil Cassidy from the Colombian Cartel.
Rewards: $10,000; Phil's Army Surplus
GTA 3 Mission - Evidence Dash
 35. Evidence Dash
Map Blip Icon Ray Machowski
Claude needs to collect some evidence for Ray.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Mission - Gone Fishing
 36. Gone Fishing
Map Blip Icon Ray Machowski
Ray wants Claude to kill his partner.
Rewards: $15,000
GTA 3 Mission - Plaster Blaster
 37. Plaster Blaster
Map Blip Icon Ray Machowski
Leon McAffrey survived! But now Claude must get rid of him once and for all.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Mission - Liberator
 38. Liberator
Map Blip Icon Donald Love
"Old Oriental Gentleman" needs saving.
Rewards: $40,000
GTA 3 Mission - Waka-Gashira Wipeout!
 39. Waka-Gashira Wipeout!
Map Blip Icon Donald Love
Donald wants Claude to start a gang war between the Yazuka and the Colombian Cartel.
Rewards: $30,000
GTA 3 Mission - A Drop In The Ocean
 40. A Drop In The Ocean
Map Blip Icon Donald Love
Claude picks up some packages that have been dropped out at sea.
Rewards: $10,000; Access to Shoreside Vale; Shoreside Vale Safehouse
GTA 3 Mission - Grand Theft Aero
 41. Grand Theft Aero
Map Blip Icon Donald Love
The packages were decoys!! Go collect the real packages.
Rewards: $50,000
GTA 3 Mission - Escort Service
 42. Escort Service
Map Blip Icon Donald Love
Escort a Securicar.
Rewards: $40,000
GTA 3 Mission - Decoy
 43. Decoy
Map Blip Icon Donald Love
Claude needs to act as a decoy for the Old Oriental Gentleman.
Rewards: $35,000
GTA 3 Mission - Love's Disappearance
 44. Love's Disappearance
Map Blip Icon Donald Love
Claude visits Donal but finds him nowhere to be found.
Rewards: -
GTA 3 Mission - Marked Man
 45. Marked Man
Map Blip Icon Ray Machowski
Ray wants Claude to escort him to the airport.
Rewards: $20,000 plus $20,000 in Ray's lockup
GTA 3 Mission - Bait
 46. Bait
Map Blip Icon Asuka Kasen
Lure three death squads into traps.
Rewards: $35,000
GTA 3 Mission - Espresso-2-Go!
 47. Espresso-2-Go!
Map Blip Icon Asuka Kasen
Destory espresso stands used by the Colombian Cartel to sell SPANK.
Rewards: $40,000
GTA 3 Mission - S.A.M.
 48. S.A.M.
Map Blip Icon Asuka Kasen
Asuka tasks Claude with blowing up a DeadDodo containing SPANK.
Rewards: -
GTA 3 Mission - Ransom
 49. Ransom
Map Blip Icon Catalina
Claude heads back to the construction site where things have gone very wrong.
Rewards: $45,000
Shoreside Vale Missions
Only one main story mission happens in Shoreside Vale Island, which is the very final mission of GTA 3. In addition, there are also 5 Pay Phone missions taking place in Shoreside Vale.

GTA 3 Mission - The Exchange
 50. The Exchange
Map Blip Icon Catalina
Rescue Maria and kill Catalina.
Rewards: $1,000,000
Pay Phone Missions (Optional)
In addition to the main missions, Claude can pick up optional missions given by various characters via certain Pay Phones across Liberty City.

The Pay Phone missions are not required for story progression, so they could be played at any time, even after the main GTA III storyline is completed.

However, if you want to achieve 100% completion, it is strongly advised to play these missions as soon as available on the respective island. The more you progress through the story, the more gangs will become increasingly hostile to you, which will make it a lot harder to complete these missions.

In particular, make sure to complete all Portland's phone missions before "Sayonara Salvatore", as after that mission Mafia will make your life really difficult in Portland.

Portland (El Burro & Marty Chonks)
Note: Marty Chonks' Pay Phone does not have a blip on the map. It's located outside of his factory in Trenton, near Joey's Garage, and it only rings between 9:00 to 19:00.

GTA 3 Phone Mission - Turismo
 1. Turismo
Map Blip Icon El Burro
Claude enters a street race.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - I Scream, You Scream
 2. I Scream, You Scream
Map Blip Icon El Burro
Claude bombs a group of gang members using an ice-cream van.
Rewards: $8,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Trial By Fire
 3. Trial By Fire
Map Blip Icon El Burro
Triads have stolen one of El Burro's cars and burned it. Return the favour by burning them.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Big'N Veiny
 4. Big'N Veiny
Map Blip Icon El Burro
Collect some magazines that have been stolen.
Rewards: $20,000 plus $10,000 if all the magazines were collected.
GTA 3 Phone Mission - The Crook
 5. The Crook
Marty Chonks
Marty wants Claude to have a "chat" with someone.
Rewards: $1,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - The Thieves
 6. The Thieves
Marty Chonks
Two thieves need dealing with.
Rewards: $2,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - The Wife
 7. The Wife
Marty Chonks
Mrs. Chonks is causing money problems that Marty wants sorting.
Rewards: $2,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Her Lover
 8. Her Lover
Marty Chonks
Mrs. Chonks was having an affair. Deal with her lover.
Rewards: $4,000
Staunton Island (King Courtney)
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Bling-Bling Scramble
 9. Bling-Bling Scramble
Map Blip Icon King Courtney
Claude enters a street race.
Rewards: $1,000 for each checkpoint Claude drives through, $15,000 is the maximum amount.
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Uzi Rider
 10. Uzi Rider
Map Blip Icon King Courtney
Claude needs to waste 10 Diablo members from the comfort of his car.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Gangcar Round-Up
 11. Gangcar Round-Up
Map Blip Icon King Courtney
King Courtney needs Claude to steal some rival gangs cars.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Kingdom Come
 12. Kingdom Come
Map Blip Icon King Courtney
Claude is betrayed by King Courtney.
Rewards: $10,000
Shoreside Vale (D-Ice)
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Uzi Money
 13. Uzi Money
Map Blip Icon D-Ice
D-Ice wants Purple Nines members dealt with.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Toyminator
 14. Toyminator
Map Blip Icon D-Ice
Destroy three Securicars.
Rewards: $10,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Rigged to Blow
 15. Rigged to Blow
Map Blip Icon D-Ice
A car rigged with a bomb needs defusing.
Rewards: $20,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Bullion Run
 16. Bullion Run
Map Blip Icon D-Ice
Claude needs to collect some platinum bullion pieces.
Rewards: $25,000
GTA 3 Phone Mission - Rumble
 17. Rumble
Map Blip Icon D-Ice
Clear out the remaining Purple Nines members.
Rewards: $10,000
How many missions are in GTA 3?
There are 67 main story missions in GTA 3 in total. You can find them all listed on this page.

Out of these, 17 missions are optional Phone missions (not required for story progression), so the main missions required to progress the GTA III storyline are 50.

However, all missions are required if you want to achieve 100% completion of the game.

GTA III Side Missions
In addition, GTA III features other optional Side Missions that can be played, which are still necessary for 100% completion.

See our section dedicated to the Side Missions in GTA 3, for a guide on all optional endeavors in the game, including the vehicles-based Sub-Missions, the 4 RC Toyz Missions, 4 Off-Road Challenges, and more.

In this section you find the complete list and guide to all the Side Missions in Grand Theft Auto III, as well as the GTA 3 Definitive Edition.

These include the classic vehicles-based Sub-Missions (such as Vigilante, Firefighter, Paramedic and Taxi Driver), 4 RC Toyz Missions, 4 Off-Road Challenges, and other extra activities in GTA 3.

While Side Missions are required for 100% completion of the game, they're not required for story progression, so they could be played at any time, even after the main GTA 3 storyline is completed.

However, it is strongly advised to complete these missions as soon as possible on each island. The more you progress through the story, the more gangs will become hostile to you, which will make it a lot harder to complete these tasks.

Vehicles Sub-Missions

Firefighter

Paramedic

Taxi Driver

Vigilante
Off-Road Challenges

A Ride in the Park

Gripped!

Multistorey Mayhem

Patriot Playground
Other Side Missions & Activities

Import/Export

Rampages

RC Toyz Missions

Unique Stunt Jumps
Pay Phone Missions
GTA 3 also features 17 Pay Phone missions that are considered "optional story missions".

These are assignments given by various characters via certain Pay Phones across Liberty City.

For a list of all the Phone Missions, see our GTA 3 Story Missions List & Guide.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GTA 4 Missions:

In this section you find the full list of all Story Missions in Grand Theft Auto IV in chronological order (though some missions are unlocked at the same time).

There is a total of 88 missions in the main storyline of GTA 4, with two possible endings (91 missions counting both ending options).

Clicking on a GTA 4 mission brings you to its full details, with Mission Giver, Rewards, Mission Objectives, Video Walkthrough, and more information.

For the missions featured in the downloadable episodes of GTA IV, see the list of Missions in The Lost and Damned and Missions in The Ballad of Gay Tony.

List of All GTA 4 Missions:
GTA 4 Mission - The Cousins Bellic
 1. The Cousins Bellic
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Roman greets Niko in Liberty City, where he finds out life isn't as simple as it seemed.
Rewards: 25$; "Off The Boat" Achievement; Broker Safehouse
GTA 4 Mission - It's Your Call
 2. It's Your Call
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Niko helps Roman escape from some Albanian Loan Sharks.
Rewards: 30$; Badger Cellphone
GTA 4 Mission - Three's a Crowd
 3. Three's a Crowd
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Niko picks up Mallorie and her friend Michelle for Roman's taxi service.
Rewards: Clothing Stores
GTA 4 Mission - First Date
 4. First Date
Map Blip Icon Michelle / Karen
Niko takes Michelle out on a date, where they play a round of bowling.
Rewards: Ability to date Michelle; Ability to Hang Out with Roman
GTA 4 Mission - Bleed Out
 5. Bleed Out
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Niko rescues Roman from the Albanian Loan Sharks, who have been beating him up for not paying his debts.
Rewards: 50$; Ability to Hang Out with Roman
GTA 4 Mission - Easy Fare
 6. Easy Fare
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Niko taxis one of Roman's regular customers, Jermaine Andrews, but the police intervene.
Rewards: 100$; Pay n' Spray
GTA 4 Mission - Jamaican Heat
 7. Jamaican Heat
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Niko watches over a meeting for Little Jacob.
Rewards: 150$
GTA 4 Mission - Bull in a China Shop
 8. Bull in a China Shop
Map Blip Icon Vladimir Glebov
Vlad tasks Niko with recovering some protection money from a Chinashop owner.
Rewards: 50$; Taxi Rides
GTA 4 Mission - Hung Out to Dry
 9. Hung Out to Dry
Map Blip Icon Vladimir Glebov
Niko has to recover some more protection money for Vlad.
Rewards: 100$
GTA 4 Mission - Clean Getaway
 10. Clean Getaway
Map Blip Icon Vladimir Glebov
Niko steals a car from Jimmy, who hasn't been paying his debts to Vlad
Rewards: 150$; Car Washes; Subway Stations
GTA 4 Mission - Ivan the Not So Terrible
 11. Ivan the Not So Terrible
Map Blip Icon Vladimir Glebov
Vlad tasks Niko with killing Ivan Bytchkov.
Rewards: 200$
GTA 4 Mission - Concrete Jungle
 12. Concrete Jungle
Map Blip Icon Little Jacob
Little Jacob asks Niko for help on dealing with some drug dealers who have been troubling him and Real Badman.
Rewards: 200$
GTA 4 Mission - Uncle Vlad
 13. Uncle Vlad
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Niko kills Vlad after finding out Mallorie is having an affair with him.
Rewards: "Feed the Fish" Achievement
GTA 4 Mission - Crime and Punishment
 14. Crime and Punishment
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Niko is ordered to do work for Mikhail Faustin after killing his employee, Vlad.
Rewards: 200$
GTA 4 Mission - Do You Have Protection?
 15. Do You Have Protection?
Map Blip Icon Mikhail Faustin
Niko and Dimitri collect some protection money from a porn producer.
Rewards: 400$; Underground Gun Shops
GTA 4 Mission - Shadow
 16. Shadow
Map Blip Icon Little Jacob
Niko kills some drug dealers who are reducing Little Jacob and Badman profits.
Rewards: 250$; Little Jacob as a friend; Jobs from Little Jacob
GTA 4 Mission - Final Destination
 17. Final Destination
Map Blip Icon Mikhail Faustin
Niko is tasked with killing Lenny Petrovic, son of powerful Kenny Petrovic
Rewards: 500$
GTA 4 Mission - No Love Lost
 18. No Love Lost
Map Blip Icon Mikhail Faustin
Niko is tasked with murdering Anna Faustin's boyfriend, a member of the Lost MC.
Rewards: 500$
GTA 4 Mission - Logging On
 19. Logging On
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
On Roman's reccomendation, Niko logs onto the Internet at a Tw@t Internet Cafe.
Rewards: Tw@ Access
GTA 4 Mission - Rigged to Blow
 20. Rigged to Blow
Map Blip Icon Mikhail Faustin
Faustin orders Niko to blow up one of Kenny Petrovic's garages using a bomb truck.
Rewards: 700$
GTA 4 Mission - Search and Delete
 21. Search and Delete
Map Blip Icon Brucie Kibbutz
Brucie Kibbutz offers to pay Niko a lot of money for an assassination.
Rewards: 3,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Easy as Can Be
 22. Easy as Can Be
Map Blip Icon Brucie Kibbutz
Niko is tasked by Brucie with stealing Lyle Rivas' car.
Rewards: 3,500$
GTA 4 Mission - The Master and the Molotov
 23. The Master and the Molotov
Map Blip Icon Dimitri Rascalov
Mikhail Faustin meets his demise.
Rewards: Body Armor
GTA 4 Mission - Russian Revolution
 24. Russian Revolution
Map Blip Icon Dimitri Rascalov
Little Jacob suspects Dimitri's motives and insists on joining Niko for his deal.
Rewards: -
GTA 4 Mission - Roman's Sorrow
 25. Roman's Sorrow
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Roman and Niko find themselves facing a difficult situation.
Rewards: "Lowest Point" Achievement; South Bohan Safehouse
GTA 4 Mission - Out of the Closet
 26. Out of the Closet
Map Blip Icon Brucie Kibbutz
Niko goes on a date, and it goes exactly as planned.
Rewards: 6,750$
GTA 4 Mission - No. 1
 27. No. 1
Map Blip Icon Brucie Kibbutz
Niko and Brucie win a street race in a sports car.
Rewards: 6,750$; Brucie as a friend
GTA 4 Mission - Escuela of the Streets
 28. Escuela of the Streets
Map Blip Icon Manny Escuela
Mallorie introduces Niko to Manny Escuela for some extra work.
Rewards: 1,000$; Mel random encounter
GTA 4 Mission - Street Sweeper
 29. Street Sweeper
Map Blip Icon Manny Escuela
Niko helps Manny clean up Bohan's streets.
Rewards: 1,100$
GTA 4 Mission - Luck of the Irish
 30. Luck of the Irish
Map Blip Icon Elizabeta Torres
Elizabeta Torres asks Niko to keep watch over a deal involving Patrick McReary that she isn't too comfortable with.
Rewards: 1,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Blow Your Cover
 31. Blow Your Cover
Map Blip Icon Elizabeta Torres
Niko, Playboy X and Johnny Klebitz get ambushed by the NOOSE and LCPD in a drug deal.
Rewards: 2,000$; Algonquin is now available; Colony Island; Happiness Island; Modo Clothing; Perseus Clothing; Integrity 2.0 Radio
GTA 4 Mission - The Puerto Rican Connection
 32. The Puerto Rican Connection
Map Blip Icon Manny Escuela
Manny tasks Niko with killing some former friends who have been mocking Manny's new show.
Rewards: 1,500$; Ilyena, Hossan, Sara and Pathos random encounters.
GTA 4 Mission - The Snow Storm
 33. The Snow Storm
Map Blip Icon Elizabeta Torres
Elizabeta has been ripped off by one of Little Jacob's contacts, and Niko has to recover her coke.
Rewards: 2,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Have a Heart
 34. Have a Heart
Map Blip Icon Elizabeta Torres
Elizabeta kills Manny and his cameraman, and Niko disposes of the bodies.
Rewards: 3,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Call and Collect
 35. Call and Collect
Map Blip Icon Francis McReary
Niko meets Francis McReary and helps silence his blackmailer.
Rewards: 1,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Harboring a Grudge
 36. Harboring a Grudge
Map Blip Icon Patrick McReary
Niko assists Packie in stealing some illegal meds smuggled in the country by the Triads.
Rewards: 7,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Waste Not Want Knots
 37. Waste Not Want Knots
Map Blip Icon Patrick McReary
Niko, Packie and his associates storm a warehouse belonging to the Ancelottis.
Rewards: 8,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Three Leaf Clover
 38. Three Leaf Clover
Map Blip Icon Patrick McReary
Niko, Packie, Derrick and Michael rob the Bank of Liberty City.
Rewards: 250,000$; "Full Exploration" Achievement; Alderney is now available; Packie is now available as a friend
GTA 4 Mission - Final Interview
 39. Final Interview
Map Blip Icon Francis McReary
Niko has a job interview.
Rewards: 1,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Holland Nights
 40. Holland Nights
Map Blip Icon Francis McReary
Niko reluctantly agrees to do one more job for Francis McReary;
Rewards: 5,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Lure
 41. Lure
Map Blip Icon Francis McReary
Francis has even more problems and asks Niko for further help.
Rewards: 5,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Deconstruction for Beginners
 42. Deconstruction for Beginners
Map Blip Icon Playboy X
Niko raids a construction site in Castle Gardens for Playboy X.
Rewards: 6,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Photo Shoot
 43. Photo Shoot
Map Blip Icon Playboy X
Niko indentifies Playboy X's target by taking a photo of him, then silences him.
Rewards: 6,750$; Whiz Cellphone
GTA 4 Mission - Ruff Rider
 44. Ruff Rider
Map Blip Icon Dwayne Forge
Dwayne Forge wants the money he sent to his girlfriend while in prison back, as he finds out she was having an affair.
Rewards: 6,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Undress to Kill
 45. Undress to Kill
Map Blip Icon Dwayne Forge
Niko retakes The Triangle Club for Dwayne, as he used to own it.
Rewards: 6,250$
GTA 4 Mission - Wrong is Right
 46. Wrong is Right
Map Blip Icon United Liberty Paper Contact
Niko has to do work for the ULP in exchange for protection.
Rewards: 6,750$
GTA 4 Mission - Portrait of a Killer
 47. Portrait of a Killer
Map Blip Icon United Liberty Paper Contact
Niko is tasked with killing Adam Dimayev, who is financing terrorist activity.
Rewards: 6,750$
GTA 4 Mission - Hostile Negotiation
 48. Hostile Negotiation
Map Blip Icon Mallorie Bardas
Mallorie thinks Roman has been kidnapped, and Niko investigates.
Rewards: Middle Park East Safehouse; Cavalcades as Roman's service vehicle
GTA 4 Mission - The Holland Play
 49. The Holland Play
Map Blip Icon Playboy X
Niko has to make a difficult decision.
Rewards: 25,000$; (If Killing Dwayne Forge); Playboy X's penthouse; Dwayne Forge as a friend (If killing Playboy X)
GTA 4 Mission - Dust Off
 50. Dust Off
Map Blip Icon United Liberty Paper Contact
Niko has to follow and steal a helicopter, then lands it at Francis International Airport.
Rewards: 7,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Paper Trail
 51. Paper Trail
Map Blip Icon United Liberty Paper Contact
Little Jacob joins Niko in order to take down Eduard Borodin in his helicopter.
Rewards: 7,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Actions Speak Louder than Words
 52. Actions Speak Louder than Words
Map Blip Icon Gerald McReary
Niko assassinates Tony Black, a high-ranking capo Ancelotti member.
Rewards: 9,000$
GTA 4 Mission - I Need Your Clothes, Your Boots, and Your Motorcycle
 53. I Need Your Clothes, Your Boots, and Your Motorcycle
Map Blip Icon Gerald McReary
Niko creates more trouble between the Albanians and the Ancelotti.
Rewards: 9,250$; Albanian Biker Jacket
GTA 4 Mission - Smackdown
 54. Smackdown
Map Blip Icon Derrick McReary
Derrick McReary asks Niko to kill one of his war mates, Bucky Sligo.
Rewards: 6,500$; Alderney City Safehouse (if A Long Way to Fall is completed)
GTA 4 Mission - A Long Way to Fall
 55. A Long Way to Fall
Map Blip Icon Ray Boccino
Niko takes out Teddy Benavidez for Ray Boccino
Rewards: 8,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Babysitting
 56. Babysitting
Map Blip Icon Derrick McReary
Niko helps Kim Young-Guk smuggle counterfeit money in Liberty City.
Rewards: 7,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Tunnel of Death
 57. Tunnel of Death
Map Blip Icon Derrick McReary
Niko silences Aiden O'Malley, who is in police custody.
Rewards: 7,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Blood Brothers
 58. Blood Brothers
Map Blip Icon Francis McReary
Niko has to make yet another difficult decision regarding the McRearys.
Rewards: 10,000$ / 20,000$ (If killing Derrick); Ability to lose wanted level (if Derrick is killed)
GTA 4 Mission - Undertaker
 59. Undertaker
Map Blip Icon Patrick McReary
Niko attends the funeral of one of Packie's brothers (either Francis or Derrick depending on who the player chose).
Rewards: -
GTA 4 Mission - Taking in the Trash
 60. Taking in the Trash
Map Blip Icon Ray Boccino
Niko and several workers pick up diamonds hidden in trash bags.
Rewards: 9,000$; Liberty Sanitation Department outfit
GTA 4 Mission - Meltdown
 61. Meltdown
Map Blip Icon Ray Boccino
Luca's crew betray Ray Boccino, and Niko confronts them.
Rewards: 9,500$
GTA 4 Mission - I'll Take Her
 62. I'll Take Her
Map Blip Icon Gerald McReary
Gerald instructs Niko to kidnap Grace Ancelotti, the daughter of Don Giovanni.
Rewards: 9,500$; "Gracefully Taken" Achievement
GTA 4 Mission - Museum Piece
 63. Museum Piece
Map Blip Icon Ray Boccino
Niko tries to sell the diamonds to Isaac Roth with Johnny Klebitz's support, but is interrupted and the diamonds are stolen by Luis Lopez, while the money is stolen by Klebitz.
Rewards: 9,500$; "Impossible Trinity" Achievement
GTA 4 Mission - No Way on the Subway
 64. No Way on the Subway
Map Blip Icon Ray Boccino
Niko deals with some bikers from the Lost MC as revenge for Johnny stealing the money from the museum deal.
Rewards: 10,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Late Checkout
 65. Late Checkout
Map Blip Icon Ray Boccino
Niko kills Isaac Roth for Ray Boccino.
Rewards: 11,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Weekend at Florian's
 66. Weekend at Florian's
Map Blip Icon Ray Boccino
Niko finds the location of a long lost friend.
Rewards: -
GTA 4 Mission - Ransom
 67. Ransom
Map Blip Icon Patrick McReary
Niko takes a photo of Grace as proof of her kidnapping.
Rewards: 9,500$
GTA 4 Mission - She's a Keeper
 68. She's a Keeper
Map Blip Icon Gerald McReary
The Ancelottis have tracked Gracie down, so Niko has to move her to a different safehouse.
Rewards: 9,750$
GTA 4 Mission - Hating the Haters
 69. Hating the Haters
Map Blip Icon Bernie Crane
Niko takes out a homopohobic thug for Bernie Crane.
Rewards: 6,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Union Drive
 70. Union Drive
Map Blip Icon Bernie Crane
Niko takes out some of Bernie's blackmailers.
Rewards: 6,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Buoys Ahoy
 71. Buoys Ahoy
Map Blip Icon Bernie Crane
Bernie takes Niko out for a fun day.
Rewards: 6,500$; Unique Infernus
GTA 4 Mission - Truck Hustle
 72. Truck Hustle
Map Blip Icon Phil Bell
Bell asks Niko to steal a truck filled with heroin from the Triads.
Rewards: 11,000$; The Fixer's Assassinations
GTA 4 Mission - Pegorino's Pride
 73. Pegorino's Pride
Map Blip Icon Jimmy Pegorino
Niko watches over a deal for Jimmy Pegorino.
Rewards: 10,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Payback
 74. Payback
Map Blip Icon Jimmy Pegorino
Pegorino wants Niko to kill all the Pavanos at a pickup.
Rewards: -
GTA 4 Mission - Catch the Wave
 75. Catch the Wave
Map Blip Icon Phil Bell
Niko and Phil steal some boats filled with smuggled drugs.
Rewards: 7,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Trespass
 76. Trespass
Map Blip Icon Phil Bell
Phil instruct Niko to kill Ancelotti Underboss Charles Matteo.
Rewards: 10,500$
GTA 4 Mission - To Live and Die in Alderney
 77. To Live and Die in Alderney
Map Blip Icon Phil Bell
Phil, Niko and Frankie Gallo attempt to offload the stolen truckload of heroin. However, the FIB have been watching the house and the trio gets ambushed.
Rewards: 12,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Diamonds are a Girl's Best Friend
 78. Diamonds are a Girl's Best Friend
Map Blip Icon Gerald McReary
The deal with the Ancelottis is interrupted by Ray Bulgarin, but the diamonds are lost.
Rewards: -
GTA 4 Mission - Entourage
 79. Entourage
Map Blip Icon Jon Gravelli
Niko meets Jon Gravelli and escorts Bobby Jefferson to the City Hall for him.
Rewards: 12,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Dining Out
 80. Dining Out
Map Blip Icon Jon Gravelli
Gravelli asks Niko to take out Kim Young-Guk, who is selling counterfeit money at discount.
Rewards: 13,250$
GTA 4 Mission - Liquidize the Assets
 81. Liquidize the Assets
Map Blip Icon Jon Gravelli
Niko meets Gravelli alongside the ULP Contact, who ask him to distrupt a deal between Russians and Ancelottis.
Rewards: 14,500$
GTA 4 Mission - Flatline
 82. Flatline
Map Blip Icon Jimmy Pegorino
Niko silences Anthony Corrado, who struck a deal with the FIB against Pegorino.
Rewards: 13,000$; Doctor's Outfit (If picked up)
GTA 4 Mission - Pest Control
 83. Pest Control
Map Blip Icon Jimmy Pegorino
Pegorino asks Niko to assassinate Ray Boccino.
Rewards: 14,500$
GTA 4 Mission - That Special Someone
 84. That Special Someone
Map Blip Icon Niko Bellic
Niko gets to choose the fate of Darko, his betrayer and the person he's been searching for since the war.
Rewards: "That Special Someone" Achievement
GTA 4 Mission - One Last Thing
 85. One Last Thing
Map Blip Icon Jimmy Pegorino
Pegorino asks Niko to strike a deal with Rascalov. Niko gets to choose.
Rewards: -
GTA 4 Deal Ending:
GTA 4 Mission - If the Price is Right
 86. If the Price is Right
Map Blip Icon Jimmy Pegorino
Niko decides to strike a deal with Dimitri, but he gets betrayed once again.
Rewards: 250,000$
GTA 4 Mission - Mr and Mrs Bellic (Deal)
 87. Mr and Mrs Bellic (Deal)
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Niko faces tragedy at Roman's wedding.
Rewards: -
GTA 4 Mission - A Revenger's Tragedy
 88. A Revenger's Tragedy
Map Blip Icon Little Jacob
Niko takes down Dimitri Rascalov as revenge for Roman's death and his betrayals.
Rewards: "You Won!" Achievement
GTA 4 Revenge Ending:
GTA 4 Mission - A Dish Served Cold
 86. A Dish Served Cold
Map Blip Icon Niko Bellic
Niko decides to take revenge on Dimtri for his betrayals.
Rewards: -
GTA 4 Mission - Mr and Mrs Bellic (Revenge)
 87. Mr and Mrs Bellic (Revenge)
Map Blip Icon Roman Bellic
Niko faces tragedy at Roman's wedding.
Rewards: -
GTA 4 Mission - Out of Commission
 88. Out of Commission
Map Blip Icon Little Jacob
Niko takes revenge on Pegorino for Kate's death.
Rewards: "You Won!" Achievement; 250,000$
GTA 4 Side Missions
In addition, GTA IV features other optional Side Missions that can be played, which are still necessary for 100% completion.

See our section dedicated to the Side Missions in GTA IV, for a guide on all optional endeavors in the game, including Assassinations, Races, Vehicle Exports & Thefts, Vigilante and Taxi Driver missions, encounters with Random Characters, and more.


